ECE1501H - Error Control Codes
This course provides an introduction to error control techniques, with emphasis on decoding algorithms. Topics include algebraic coding theory: finite fields, linear codes, cyclic codes, BCH codes and decoding, Reed-Solomon codes; iterative decoding: codes defined on graphs, the sum-product algorithm, low-density parity-check codes, turbo codes.

ECE1502H - Information Theory
This course deals with fundamental limits on communication, including the following topics: entropy, relative entropy and mutual information: entropy rates for stochastic processes; differential entropy; data compression; the Kraft inequality; Shannon-Fano codes; Huffman codes; arithmetic coding; channel capacity; discrete channels; the random coding bound and its converse; the capacity of Gaussian channels; the sphere-packing bound; coloured Gaussian noise and water-filling; rate-distortion theory; the rate-distortion function; multiuser information theory.

ECE1504H - Statistical Learning
Exclusions: ECE421H, CSC411H1/CSC2515H, ECE1513H
This course is designed for students with a background in communication systems and information theory, interested in doing research in machine learning. The first half of the course will focus on one-shot approaches in multiuser information theory and discuss some applications to machine learning. The second half will develop information theoretic bounds on the generalization error in statistical learning. The final course project is expected to be on a topic at the intersection of information theory and machine learning.

ECE1505H - Convex Optimization
This course provides a comprehensive coverage of the theoretical foundation and numerical algorithms for convex optimization with engineering applications. Topics include: convex sets and convex functions; convex optimization problems; least-square problems; optimal control problems; Lagrangian duality theory. Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) theorem; Slater’s condition; generalized inequalities; minimiax optimization and saddle point; introduction to linear programming, quadratic programming, semidefinite programming and geometric programming; numerical algorithms: descent methods, Newton’s method, interior-point method; convex relaxation; applications to communications and signal processing.

ECE1508H - Special Topics in Communications: Multiuser Information Theory
This course will focus on a systematic approach for proving coding theorems for a variety of multi-user channels. A few basic techniques will be introduced in the first part of the course and their application to several multi-user source and channel coding problems will be discussed. Topics include: Point to Point Information Theory, Multiple Access Channel, Broadcast Channel, Distributed Source Coding, Information Theoretic Secrecy, Relay Channels and Source and Channel Coding over Networks.

ECE1508H - Special Topics in Communications: Advanced Cellular Systems (4G/5G) - Fundamental Principles and Software Radio Implementation
This course will cover the fundamental concepts in the design of state of the art cellular systems including the theory and implementation of the physical layer in software radio.
The course will cover the basic properties of multipath fading channels including channel variation over frequency, time, and space, and models for fading channel simulation. Sate of the art modulation schemes include QAM, SC-FDMA, and OFDM with soft-decision detection. Advanced antenna techniques including receiver and transmitted diversity, beamforming, and MIMO. The concepts of channel matrix rank, transmission layers, precoding, MU-MIMO, and antenna port concepts as used in LTE/5G.
The physical layer in LTE/5G including frame structure, design of sequences, physical signals, physical shared channels, control channels (4G/5G), broadcast, and access channels. Fundamental channels and physical signals in 5G and their evolution from LTE, including demodulation reference signals, channel sounding signals, position reference signals, and phase tracking signals. Error control techniques including CRC, convolutional code, turbo code, polar codes, and LDPC codes, including Hybrid-ARQ, will be discussed. Basic concepts in software radio, including down-conversion, sampling, synchronization, carrier offset estimation and correction, symbol and frame synchronization, channel estimation, extraction of the various channels from a noisy signal.
The course will have a lab component based on Matlab with the LTE Toolbox and analyze and build receivers for generated LTE/5G test signals and off-air received signals.

ECE1508H - Special Topics in Communications: Network Softwarization: Technologies and Enablers
This course is one of two companion courses on network softwarization offered simultaneously in the Winter 2018 session. The first course introduces concepts and principles of network softwarization while the second course (this one) focuses on hands on experience with softwarization technologies and enablers. The courses will be offered simultaneously in 4 Universities, namely University of Waterloo, University of Toronto, Université Laval and École des Technologies Supérieures (ETS).

ECE1508H - Special Topics in Communications: Cyber-Physical Security of Connected, Autonomous, Shared, and Electrified Vehicles
This course aims to introduce to graduate students the methods, processes, tools, and standards to specify, build and test automotive cyber-physical security. In the first part, we provide a deep overview of hardware while the second part focuses on the software aspects that allow enabling hardware/software co-design. Through lectures and labs, students shall be exposed to cybersecurity principles at different levels for current automotive systems and connected and autonomous vehicles. They will learn best practices for trustworthy cyber-physical systems security (CPSS) in modern vehicular systems, identify and define properties related to safety and cybersecurity associated with current research and industry trends, and will be able to use and adapt different methods, processes, tools, and standards for analyzing and verifying such properties as relevant for different automotive domains.

ECE1508H - Special Topics in Communications: Graphs, Codes, and Inference
This course provides an introduction to error-correction, signal processing, and inference on “graphs”. We will start with graph-based error correcting codes and associated decoding methods and continue on to topics such as signal processing on graphs and other graph-based information processing methods. Viewing (and designing) error-correction codes and decoding algorithms from a graph-based viewpoint has revolutionized the theory and practice of error correction in the past 20 years. While the initial focus of the course is on error correction, the techniques used to analyze the performance of these codes, and the algorithmic methods used to decode them, connect to diverse areas of statistical inference including machine learning and statistical physics. Topics in past offerings of the course include turbo, low-density parity-check (LDPC), “fountain”, spatially-coupled, and Polar codes; iterative decoding techniques such as the sum-product algorithm; code design techniques; threshold analysis via density evolution; coded caching; signal-processing on graphs. The error-correction portion of the course is designed to complement ECE 1501H (Error Control Codes), but that course is not a prerequisite. Students in engineering, the computer sciences, and math will find this course interesting.

ECE1510H - Advanced Inference Algorithms
Prerequisite: ECE521H1 or equivalent.
Advanced concepts in machine learning and probabilistic inference. An introductory course on inference algorithms or machine learning should be taken prior to this course. Topics covered: Probability models, neural networks, graphical models, Bayesian networks, factor graphs, Markov random fields (MRFs). Structured models, convolutional networks, transformations as hidden variables, bivariate and trivariate potentials, high-order potentials. Exact probabilistic inference, variable elimination, sum-product and max-product algorithms, factorizing high-order potentials. Approximate probabilistic inference, iterated conditional modes, gradient-based inference, loopy belief propagation, variational techniques, expectation propagation, sampling methods (MCMC). Learning in directed and undirected models, EM, sampling, contrastive divergence. Deep belief networks. Applications to image processing, scene analysis, pattern recognition, speech recognition, computational biology.

ECE1513H - Introduction to Machine Learning
Prerequisites: STA286H1, ECE302H1 or equivalent
Exclusions: ECE421H, ECE521H1, CSC411H1/CSC2515H, ECE1504H
An Introduction to the basic theory, the fundamental algorithms, and the computational toolboxes of machine learning. The focus is on a balanced treatment of the practical and theoretical approaches, along with hands on experience with relevant software packages. Supervised learning methods covered in the course will include: the study of linear models for classification and regression and  neural networks. Unsupervised learning methods covered in the course will include: principal component analysis, k-means clustering, and Gaussian mixture models. Techniques to control overfitting, including regularization and validation, will be covered.

ECE1511H - Signal Processing
Prerequisites: ECE310H1, ECE431H1, ECE302H1 or equivalent.
Signal processing techniques using special purpose digital hardware and general purpose digital computers are playing an increasingly important role. The course deals with some introductory and some advanced topics in the area. In particular, it presents the characterization of random discrete time signals. It provides an introduction to traditional and modern statistical discrete time signal processing frameworks, including processing with second-, higher- and fractional lower -order statistics. It discusses sampling and multirate signal conversion; linear prediction and optimum linear filters; least squares methods for system modeling and design; theory and applications of adaptive filters. It also deals with applications in signal and image processing and analysis.

ECE1512H - Digital Image Processing and Applications
Prerequisites: ECE431H1 or equivalent.
This course will present the concepts of the main processing techniques for digital image processing. It will cover image enhancement and restoration, digital filtering (linear and nonlinear), local space operators, image analysis, and elements of vision. It will also describe the impact of digital image processing to the more important fields of application.

ECE1517H - Biometric Systems
This is an introductory level course for graduate students or practitioners to gain knowledge and hands-on experiences in biometric systems and security applications. Topics include: Introduction to important biometric security technologies and policies, biometric modalities and signal processing, biometric solutions and applications, biometric encryption and cryptosystems, biometrics identity analysis and privacy considerations.

ECE1518H - Seminar in Identity, Privacy and Security
This interdisciplinary course examines issues of identity, privacy and security from a range of technological, policy and scientific perspectives, highlighting the relationships, overlaps, tensions, tradeoffs and synergies between them. Based on a combination of public lectures, in-depth seminar discussions and group project work, it will study contemporary identity, privacy and security systems, practices and controversies, with such focal topics as biometric identification schemes, public key encryption infrastructure, privacy enhancing technologies, identity theft risks and protections, on-line fraud detection and prevention, and computer crime, varying between offerings.

ECE1520H - Data Communications I
Prerequisites: ECE417H1 or equivalent.
This is an introductory course on digital transmission. Topics include: signal space concepts, signals with memory and Markovian models, power spectrum of digital signals, bandwidth, baseband transmission: intersymbol interference and Nyquist pulse shaping, optimum coherent symbol detection, binary and M-ary modulation, differential and noncoherent demodulation, error rate - bandwidth efficiency comparisons, sequence detection and the Viterbi algorithm. Equalization. Multi-carrier modulation.

ECE1521H - Detection and Estimation Theory
Prerequisites: ECE302H1 or equivalent.
This course presents an introduction to the principles and applications of detection and estimation theories. The main thrust is to show how statistical models can be used to provide optimal and suboptimal signal processing structures for digital communication systems operating over noisy channels. Topics covered include: classical detection theory and hypothesis testing, parameter estimation, binary and M-ary digital modulation, detection in coloured noise, coherent and non-coherent structures, detection of random signals in random noise, EM algorithm.

ECE1524H - Service Provider Networks
In last decade telecom industry has gone through transformational changes that started with the introduction of the concept of software defined networking or SDN and the emergence of Big Data as well as Machine Learning techniques. With hyper-scalers like Google and Amazon in the horizon, the landscape for traditional Telco service providers are changing. The course is primarily about this change and its profound impacts in telco service providers from different angles, including architecture, service design, business model, security and privacy. The SDN journey starts by network programmability, that is why the first part of will be walking the students through different steps of building a programmable network. Having programmable network we will have to start building intelligence by introducing closed loop control logics, the second part of the course deals with ideas around creating multilayer control logics, where we employ concepts of Big Data and Machine Learning to create innovative services. Given that SDN is meaningless without proper abstraction and interface modeling, we will discuss model driven approach to network management and from there we open the door to discuss orchestration strategies. Nowadays all telco discussions end with 5G; therefore, we explain 5G with the focus on the role of SDN there, followed by some important 5G use cases including smart cities and IoT. In the last part of the course we zoom into software defined security aspects, as well as a discussion on new methods of creating innovative services. the course will be concluded by discussing some operational aspects of SDN and the role of AI and Machine Learning there.

ECE1528H - Special Topics in Data Communications: Internet of Things - From Protocols to Applications
The course exposes students to concepts of the Internet of Things and Fog/Edge computing. The course will provide hands-on experience with IoT devices and IoT networking. Learning Objectives: understanding IoT network technologies and standards; of REST paradigm; IoT protocols; IoT system components; fog/edge networking architectures and IoT security concerns and solutions. Exposure to IoT platforms in edge and cloud; programming platforms for sensors and actuators. Ability to: build IoT application on microcontroller; build interfaces between microcontrollers and gateways/edge devices. Design an IoT device to work with a cloud infrastructure and transfer IoT data to the cloud and between cloud providers.

ECE1529H - Adaptive Systems for Signal Processing and Communications
The course explores the theoretical and practical procedures for designing adaptive systems. Topics include decision theory, parameter estimation, supervised learning, unsupervised learning, state-space models, adaptive signal detection, channel characterization, iterative detection, forward-backward adaptive algorithms.

ECE1531H - Quantum Information Theory
This is a first course on quantum information and communications theory. Topics covered include: (1) basics of quantum mechanics and quantum information, (2) resource model of quantum information processing, (3) entanglement and entanglement distillation protocols, (4) quantum cryptography and security proofs.

ECE1541H - Communication Networks I
This course teaches the fundamentals of network performance and analysis. The topics are: traffic modeling for voice, video and data, self-similarity and long range dependence in the internet, queueing systems, large deviations and buffer management, multiple access communications, scheduling and processor sharing, routing and dynamic programming, vehicular networks.

ECE1542H - Communication Networks II
Topics include: layering, distributed algorithms, network algorithms, shortest path routing, coping with link failures, optimal routing and topology design, fairness, flow control.

ECE1543H - Mobile Communications Systems
This course will cover basic principles in the design of mobile communication systems, included in the various generations of cellular systems from 1G to 5G. The radio propagation environment: basic radio propagation considerations, Rayleigh and Rician statistics, power spectral density, small scale and large scale signal variation, delay spread, Doppler spread, and angular spread, coherence bandwidth, coherence time, and coherence space; MIMO channel modeling. Link issues: modulation techniques including OFDM, diversity, interleaving, forward error correction. Principles of spread spectrum systems and CDMA. System issues: spectral sharing schemes, frequency re-use, noise and interference analysis, call and packet oriented capacity analysis, and basic scheduling approches including proportional fair. Drop oriented network simulation models. Basic aspects of cellular system standards such as GSM, WCDMA, LTE, and 5G new radio. Familiarization with software radio architecture of commercially available systems including RF chip architecture, FPGA and host processing. RF bands covered, local oscillator management and phase lock, RF filtering, down-coversion, IQ sampling, and digital filtering, frequency and phase synchronization, and demodulation. Issues in the implementation of antenna arrays and massive MIMO. The course will have various exercises based on software radio and matlab including the analysis of real off-the air cellular system pilot and synchronization signals.

ECE1548H - Advanced Network Architectures (Network Softwarization: Principles and Foundations)
This course is one of two companion courses on network softwarization offered simultaneously in the Winter 2018 session. The first course (this one) introduces concepts and principles of network softwarization while the second course focuses on hands on experience with technology enablers. The courses will be offered simultaneously in 4 Universities, namely University of Waterloo, University of Toronto, Université Laval and École des Technologies Supérieures (ETS).

ECE1549H - Stochastic Networks
Prerequisite: ECE537H1 or equivalent with continuous-time Markov chains.
An introduction to stochastic analysis techniques for complex networked systems, covering queueing networks, random graphs, and stochastic geometry. Main topics include Jackson and Whittle networks, reversible network processes, network utility maximization, stochastic network optimization, Erdős-Rényi and Gilbert models, graph evolution and connectivity, random subgraphs, random point processes, Laplace functionals, marked point processes, and Palm probability.

ECE1550H - Physics of Information
Part A: Reversible Computation and the Second Law of Thermodynamics
Reversible Computation: motivation, principle and limitations; Moore’s law and energy cost in classical computations (theory and practice); Landaurer’s principle; Maxwell’s demon and its resolution with information theory; Cost of erasure of information from the Second law of thermodynamics.
Part B: Entropy
The concept of entropy in Physics and Information Theory; Subjective (i.e. observer-dependent) nature of entropy; Resolution of Gibbs’ paradox from information theory.
Part C: von Neumman entropy and quantum computation
From classical (Shannon) entropy to quantum (von Neumann) entropy; Quantum computer as an ultimate reversible computer.
Part D: Carnot cycle in a Quantum World
The smallest possible refrigerator

ECE1551H - Mobile Broadband Radio Access Network
Prerequisite: ECE316H1
Course Exclusion: ECE1508H “Special Topics in Communications: 4G LTE for Mobile Broadband and Evolution Towards 5G”
This course covers Radio Access Network (RAN) aspects of the 5G New Radio (NR). Important RF parameters like power flux density, electrical field and various power definitions are introduced and their relationship to regulatory requirements and standards based usage are covered in great detail. Also, various RF impediments such as the noise figure, out of band emissions and ACS/ACLR are introduced. The link budget, receiver sensitivity, channel models and how they relate to 5G systems are explained. Spectrum and RF characteristics of 5G NR are an important part of the course. Moreover, we will go over the architectural solutions, remote radio heads (distributed radio solutions), and important hardware components in the network. Throughout the course, students will get substantial exposure to the practice-based content not commonly found in the textbooks. The course will offer an insight into the important industry standards and initiatives, trials and the global vendor/operator status in terms of product development and network deployments. A large selection of course projects and guest lectures from major infrastructure vendors and operators are intended to complement the material covered in the lectures.

ECE1552H - Modern Mobile Air Interfaces
Prerequisites: ECE316H1
This course provides an in-depth coverage of modern mobile air-interfaces, focusing mainly on the fourth (4G) and fifth generation (5G) of cellular networks. Following the introduction to multicarrier transmission, the key elements of layer 1, 2 and 3 of air interfaces of the 4G and 5G systems are covered in detail. Frequency division duplex and time division duplex solutions are compared and contrasted, and the differences between two main frequency ranges (i.e. below and above 6 GHz) are highlighted. Finally, the last segment of the course covers some more advanced topics, such as carrier aggregation, dual connectivity, massive machine type communication and ultra-reliable low latency communication. Students will get the latest updates from the 3GPP standardization process as they become available, and study the impact of these changes on the performance improvement of mobile networks. Additionally, students will be exposed to practical problems that operators and infrastructure vendors are facing on daily basis. Two course projects will help students to supplement the learning material within the area of their own interest. Also, guest lecturers from major infrastructure vendors and operators will be invited to complement the lecture material.

ECE516H1 - Intelligent Image Processing
This course provides the student with the fundamental knowledge needed in the rapidly growing field of Personal Cybernetics, including “Wearable Computing”, “Personal Technologies”, “Human Computer Interaction (HCI),” “Mobile Multimedia,” “Augmented Reality,” “Mediated Reality,” CyborgLogging,” and the merging of communications devices such as portable telephones with computational and imaging devices.  The focus is on fundamental aspects and new inventions for human-computer interaction.  Topics to be covered include: mediated reality, Personal Safety Devices, lifelong personal video capture, the Eye Tap principle, collinearity criterion, comparametric equations, photoquantigraphic imaging, lightvector spaces, anti-homomorphic imaging, application of personal imaging to the visual arts, and algebraic projective geometry.

ECE540H1 - Optimizing Compilers
Prerequisites: ECE242H1, recommended ECE341H1 and CSC488H1.
Theoretical and practical aspects of building modern optimizing compilers. Topics: intermediate representations, basic blocks and flow graphs, data flow analysis, partial evaluation and redundancy elimination, loop optimizations, register allocation, instruction scheduling, interprocedural analysis, and memory hierarchy optimizations, dependence analysis and automatic parallelization. Students will implement significant optimizations within the framework of a modern research compiler.

ECE552H1 - Computer Architecture
Performance analysis and metrics and cost. Instruction set architectures. Instruction-level parallelism: pipelining, superscalar, dynamic scheduling, VLIW processors. Data-level prallelism: vector processors, GPUs. Thread-level parallelism: multiprocessors, multi-core, coherence, simultaneous multi-threading. Memory hierarchies: caches and virtual memory support. Simulation tools and methods. Limited Enrollment.

ECE568H1 - Computer Security
Prerequisite: ECE344H1 or ECE353H1.
As computers permeate our society, the security of such computing systems is becoming of paramount importance. This course covers principles of computer systems security. To build secure systems, one must understand how attackers operate. This course starts by teaching students how to identify security vulnerabilities and how they can be exploited. Then techniques to create secure systems and defend against such attacks will be discussed. Industry standards for conducting security audits to establish levels of security will be introduced. The course will include an introduction to basic cryptographic techniques as well as hardware used to accelerate cryptographic operations in ATMs and webservers.

ECE1718H - Special Topics in Computer Hardware Design: Embedded Linux
This course is focused on traditional programming of embedded systems running under Linux, with emphasis on I/O methodologies. The embedded platform used in this course will include a dual-core ARM processor and a field-programmable gate array (FPGA). Lectures will cover such topics as: introduction to ARM processors and FPGA systems, introduction to embedded Linux and code development in an embedded environment, memory-mapped I/O with virtual memory in user and kernel space, kernel modules (device drivers), interrupts, and I/O devices such as buttons, switches, lights, timers, accelerometers, audio, video, A/D, USB peripherals, and developing custom hardware systems in the FPGA.
The course will include a set of required laboratory exercises. Also, each student will propose a novel design project that leverages the topics covered in the course. A project should be somewhat unique and involve development of code in a non-trivial device driver and/or user application program. Students are encouraged to make use a new types of I/O devices (many devices can be connected to Linux via USB), and/or to develop their own custom hardware components using the FPGA provided in the embedded system.

ECE1718H - Special Topics in Computer Hardware Design: Hardware-Accelerated Digital Systems
Literature shows that performance per watt can be improved by order(s) of magnitude replacing general purpose compute with application-specific accelerators. This course introduces the students to the world of hardware acceleration in digital systems. They will experience different examples of frameworks that enable the design, implementation, and optimization of such hardware/software systems. They will also be encouraged to explore new trends in the field of domain-specific system architecture. This course is intended to be pure hands-on, targeting independent students who like to tackle challenges and dig deep to get things done. Enrolled students should expect to roll up their sleeves, get familiar with new frameworks, develop some code, perform proper experimentation and analysis, and report their findings in a professional way. Suggested Background: strong software programming ability using high-level language(s) such as C, as well as experience with hardware design and implementation using hardware description language(s) such as Verilog or VHDL, and simulation using EDA tool(s). Familiarity with SIMD and GPU acceleration is a plus.

ECE1718H - Special Topics in Computer Hardware Design: Advanced Computer Architecture
TBA

ECE1718H - Special Topics in Computer Hardware Design: Socially Responsible Computing
The goal of this course is to empower students to think critically about the role of computer hardware and systems in some of the most pressing challenges facing society today including climate change, inequality and bias, healthcare, infrastructure, security and privacy. This course takes inspiration from some of the UN’s sustainable development goals including industry, innovation and infrastructure (goal 9), reduced inequalities (goal 10), responsible consumption and production (goal 12), and climate action (goal 13). The course will provide a broad overview of ethical and societal issues that are touched by computer hardware and systems, with a particular focus on sustainability.
Since the first microprocessor was introduced 50 years ago, evolving computer hardware has enabled many innovations critical to society. Consider as just one example the COVID-19 global pandemic and the role computer hardware has played in the delivery of education, facilitation of remote work, disease tracking, and drug discovery. However, we also see societal harms done by computing innovations including the spread of disinformation, propagation of bias into machine learning, and security breaches.
The course will be structured with weekly lectures by the instructor that heavily emphasize discussion. Students should have undergraduate-level knowledge of computer organization, computer hardware, computer architecture and/or computer systems. In addition to building up technical skills and knowledge, it is imperative that today’s engineer also be cognizant of the role their technology plays in society and be equipped to make informed ethical decisions. This course aims to fill a gap in graduate education in preparing socially responsible computer engineers for the workforce.

ECE1724H - Special Topics in Software Engineering: Bio-inspired Algorithms for Smart Mobility
This project-based course provides a comprehensive introduction to bio-inspired algorithms and highlights the power of these computational techniques in solving ill-structured problems in the context of smart mobility. Topics to be covered include smart mobility, geospatial data science, graph search algorithms, metaheuristics, evolutionary computing methods, swarm intelligence algorithms, and machine learning. Different case studies are discussed to show the ability of these adaptive algorithms in handling spatiotemporal analytics, design, planning and control problems that arise in smart mobility systems and services. These problems include, but are not limited to, multi-criteria routing, ridesharing/ridehailing problems, optimal placement/deployment problems, demand prediction, dynamic pricing, multi-modal transportation planning, MaaS bundling, traffic control, truck platooning and fleet management to name just a few.

ECE1724H - Special Topics in Software Systems: Artificial Intelligence
This course focuses on a variety of topics at the intersection of artificial intelligence, biology, and neuroscience. The goal is to explore the intersection of these related fields via both discussions with experts as well as dedicated student projects. During each week, experts (from within the University or outside) will be invited to present on a specific topic related to AI. Afterwards, a class discussion about the topic will ensue where students will have a chance to ask questions and participate in the conversations. Students will focus on a particular topic arising from one of the discussions to write a research paper (50% of their course grade), and to make a final course presentation (another 50% of their grade). There will be a weekly 1-hour time slot dedicated to instructor interactions with the students about their research paper and course presentation.

ECE1724H - Special Topics in Software Systems: Designing Modern Web-Scale Applications
The last decade has seen an enormous shift in computing, with the rise of cloud computing and big data processing, powered by web-scale applications. This course discusses the principles, key technologies and trends in the design of web-scale applications. The course will examine and compare the architectures and implementation of several types of web-scale applications. Students will learn how these applications are designed to achieve high scalability, reliability and high availability.
This is a seminar-style course in which students will be required to read, analyze, present and discuss seminal and cutting-edge research in this area. The aim is to both learn from prior work and extract exciting research questions. A course project will provide concrete experience and deeper understanding of the material.

ECE1724H - Special Topics in Computing: Wearable AI - Building Superintelligence for People
This course will consist of weekly lectures, seminars, and presentations, on Wearable AI (Artificial Intelligence), wearable sensing, meta-sensing, and “wearables” in the broader intellectual landscape.  Experts and invited speakers will provide specific questions that will be asked and moderated by course professor.  Students will be given ample opportunity participate in discussions and pose questions.  The weekly meetings will consist of:
Intro + course overview: Wearable AI/HI Today; History and future of wearable AR/VR/XR, important fundamental questions to be explored in the course;
Applied wearable AI platforms: Vuzix Blade and Vuzix Smart Swim; InteraXon Muse; BlueberryX.com brain-and-world-sensing eyeglass; GPS, location-based, cloud-based, heart monitors; physical, affective, and mental health sensing.
All Reality (Wearable AI and AR, VR, and XR) with Tom Furness, the “Grandfather of Virtual Reality (VR)”;
History and state-of-the-art in VR
Superhumachines and the IEEE Council on Extended Intelligence;
Extended senses, sensing, and metasensing
The wearable AI industry featuring InteraXon CEO, BlueberryX CEO, and the Founder and CEO of Vuzix, Paul Travers, as well as Smart Swim creator, Craig Travers
Final project presentations.
Looking into the future: What we’ll be/become. What will be the most important breakthrough in wearable AI and how will it affect humanity in 5 years, 10 years, 20 years, and 40 years?

ECE1747H - Parallel Programming
This course is an intermediate graduate course in the area of parallel programming. In the first part of the course we will briefly introduce the architecture of parallel systems and the concept of data dependencies/races. The three most commonly used parallel programming paradigms (shared memory, distributed memory and data parallel) will then be examined in detail. An overview of automatic parallelization of programs and the use of parallel processing in related domains such as parallel and distributed database transaction processing will also be given.
In the second part of the course selected research topics will be examined. This part of the course consists of student-lead discussions of relevant research papers. A research-intensive group project in an area related to program parallelization is a fundamental part of the course.
The projects can be done individually or in small teams of two or three people. The project outcome will be presented in a class session at the end of the semester.
Recommended: an undergraduate course in operating systems.

ECE1749H - Interconnection Networks for Parallel Computer Architectures
Interconnection networks form the communication backbone of computers at a variety of scales, from the internet to on-chip networks in multi-core/many-core architectures. With growing emphasis on parallelism as a means of extracting additional processor performance, the communication substrate is a critical factor in both the performance and power consumption of many-core architectures. This course will explore the architecture and design of interconnection networks including topology, routing, flow control and router microarchitecture. This course will also look into the impact on communication requirements of various parallel architectures and cache coherence mechanism. This graduate-level course will focus on interconnection network architectures used in multiprocessor systems and many-core designs with emphasis on recent research innovations in these areas.

ECE1754H - Compilation Techniques for Parallel Processors
An introduction to compiler analyses and techniques used in the automatic parallelization of programs.  Topics include:  data dependence, dependence testers, loop-level parallelization, loop transformations, loop scheduling, locality management, data distribution, computation partitioning, task-level parallelization, case studies.  Students carry out a significant literature survey or a programming project in one of the course topics.

ECE1755H - Parallel Computer Architecture and Programming
Prerequisites: basic computer architecture and operating systems
With the advent of multicore processors, we are faced with the challenge of exploiting this ubiquitous multi-threaded hardware. This course explores the evolution of modern parallel architectures and programming models, and is divided into two phases. In the first phase, we will investigate in detail the design and operation of modern parallel architectures, with a brief look at how they are programmed.
The second phase of the course will switch gears: we will study current research and development of emerging parallel architectures including multicore processors, interconnection networks, and accelerators and heterogeneous systems-on-chip. In this phase we will read research papers, and through the class project, implement and evaluate new ideas. Students are welcome to suggest topics for class discussion and/or projects.

ECE1756H - Reconfigurable Computing and FPGA Architecture
Field Programmable Gate Arrays are computer chips whose function and wiring can be re-programmed to suit different purposes. FPGAs enable “reconfigurable computing” wherein one can create a custom computing engine with higher efficiency than a conventional software-programmed device, without the expense and difficulty of manufacturing a custom chip. As the development costs of custom (ASIC) computer chips have exploded and the capabilities of FPGAs have increased, FPGAs have become an ever more popular choice to implement complex systems. This course will explore both the use of FPGAs and the design of the FPGA architecture itself.
Through hands-on work students will compare the efficiency and programming effort of FPGA-based signal processing with a DSP processor implementation. We will analyze how well various classes of applications will map to FPGAs vs. alternative highly parallel solutions such as DSP processors and GPUs.
We will also study the architecture of FPGAs: what are the building blocks of FPGAs, how are they interconnected, and what makes a good vs. a bad architecture? Students will learn how to model the area and delay of key circuitry such as RAM blocks and programmable routing, how the ability of Computer-Aided Design (CAD) tools to target different structures affects FPGA architecture, and how to experimentally evaluate new FPGAs. Finally, we will discuss emerging architectures and possible future directions for FPGA evolution.

ECE1759H - Advances in Operating Systems
This course examines current research topics in the area of operating systems. Prerequisites: Advanced Operating Systems Course. Operating system implementation experience.

ECE1762H - Algorithms and Data Structures
This is a fundamental course for all majors in computer engineering and electronics. Initially, it will review background in combinatorics and basic data structures. Next, we will cover in detail advanced algorithmic design techniques and data structures, including: quicksort (randomized, deterministic), selecting in linear time, red-black trees, hash tables and hash functions, lower bounds, amortized analysis and splay trees, dynamic programming, greedy methods, graph algorithms, spanning trees, shortest paths, network flow, NP completeness and approximation algorithms.

ECE1767H - Design for Test and Testability
Prerequisites: Any senior-level VLSI design or logic design course plus intermediate level skills in programming with C or C++.
The Semiconductor Industry Association anticipates that Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) semi-conductor devices of the near future will indeed be “very large”, including designs that integrate 100-200 million transistors operating in 1-3 GHz clock rates. Due to the increasing dependence on microelectronic devices and the concern for high reliability and short time-to-market window, the VLSI Computer Aided Design community faces great challenges in the development of tools that aid the design of complex devices and guarantee their functionality.
This course covers fundamentals of testing theory and practice for complex VLSI designs and it is a good source of information for engineers with interests in chip and system level design, test engineers and CAD developers. The objective is to give students the ability to solve a wide range of non-trivial testing problems using practical and cost effective techniques. Computer-aided design tools will be developed throughout the semester from the students. These tools will serve as an application of the theory presented in class. Topics covered include Logic Simulation, Fault Modeling, Fault Simulation, Algorithms and techniques for Automatic Test Pattern Generation in Combinational and Sequential Circuits (D-algorithm, PODEM, recursive learning), Design Error/Fault Diagnosis, Introduction to Functional Testing of Microprocessors, ALUs and Memories, Design for Testability, and logic and scan Built-in Self-Test.
Course requirements include a full-term design project and a final exam. During the project, each student will develop a parallel fault simulator and a test generator for single stuck-at faults in combinational and sequential circuits.

ECE1769H - Behavioral Synthesis of Digital Integrated Circuits
This course presents theory and practice for the synthesis of digital systems at the behavioral level (algorithm level), register transfer level and logic level. Lecture topics focus on classic subjects such as micro-architecture, control/data flow analysis, optimization, scheduling, resource and interconnect binding, multi-level logic synthesis, technology mapping and retiming. Lecture topics also extend to cover advanced frontend issues, such as the synthesis of object oriented language constructs, as well as advanced backend issues, such as the interaction with layout design. The class project involves the construction of a complete behavioral synthesis tool from C to synthesizable HDL.

ECE1770H - Trends in Middleware Systems –Blockchain Technology
The objectives of this course are to understand the characteristics of emerging blockchain abstractions, how they differ in conception and use, and how to apply blockchains to build distributed applications. We refer to these abstractions as “blockchain middleware”.
A “middleware system” - middleware for short, - constitutes services and (programming) abstractions that facilitate the development of distributed applications and systems in heterogeneous networked environments. The primary objectives of middleware are to increase application reliability, availability, fault-tolerance, scalability, and security. At least conceptually, the “middleware layer” comprises a layer below the application and above the operating system and network substrate.
This course targets research-oriented graduate students who would like to learn more about blockchain middleware. We will discuss the Bitcoin blockchain, the Ethereum blockchain, and the Hyperledger blockchain as well as explore how to build blockchain-based applications. The course will feature invited speakers and student paper presentations. A course project will be a mandatory aspect of the course.

ECE1771H - Quality of Service
This course aims to present a collection of fundamental design principles and guidelines in modern distributed systems and real- world large-scale networks. In the process, we review a small collection of important research results, not only in the recent literature but also in the literature spanning the past two decades, and see how they reflect fundamental design principles that we have discussed. Our focus is on more recent research literature, in the areas that have been studied extensively: multimedia networking, peer- to-peer networks, as well as multi-hop wireless networks.
The holy grail of distributed systems and networking design is to achieve Quality of Service, or QoS. Quality of Service is concerned with the “peace of mind” that resources are set aside to guarantee a particular level of performance, even with competition from other users sharing the same pool of resources. We will see why this is hard, and why it sometimes may not be necessary. However, having such an objective is important to motivate innovation in the design of distributed systems and real-world networks, wireless or wired.
The course is divided into a number of episodes (each covered in the time of approximately one lecture depending on progress). We start with an examination of our design objectives, including Quality of Service. We then introduce a number of fundamental design principles that may lead to a high-quality design. Subsequently, we take a leisure walk through more specific areas of research, spanning peer- to-peer networks, wireless mesh networks, secure protocols, so-called “killer” applications, as well as recent advances in network coding. Throughout the course, we revisit the design principles often, and see how they affect the successes (or failures) of research ideas.

ECE1773H - Advanced Computer Architecture
Prerequisites: Basic uniprocessor design. Basic Instruction set. Computer organization. Hardwired and Microcoded control. Basic pipelining. Basic Memory Systems.
State-of-the-art Uniprocessor Design. In a nutshell we ask not “how can I build a processor that works?” but “how can we build the ‘best’ processor possible?”. The following topics are included: instruction set architecture, performance analysis and metrics, cost, simulation methods and tools, instruction-level parallelism, vector processors, VLIW processors. Advanced uniprocessor prediction-based techniques and memory systems. If you will be pursuing research in computer architecture this course provides the knowledge necessary to get started. If you will not be pursuing research in computer architecture this course will expose you to the current cutting-edge techniques used in modern processors.

ECE1774H - Sensory Cybernetics
Note: Students who took the course Sensory Cybernetics and the Theoretical Foundation of the Senses will not be allowed to take this course under the new title.
The senses from the point of view of an engineer. This course explores the theoretical foundations of the senses from both a systems and a neurophysiological point of view. Emphasis will be placed on understanding the senses holistically rather than individually (i.e. we study the common features that span the various sensory modalities). The course material will involve the application of ideas drawn from information theory, statistical signal detection theory and probability theory. In particular, we cover the following theories: (1) the signal detection approach to sensory analysis (vis-à-vis Donald Laming’s theory of differential coupling), the information encoded by sensory neurons, generalized Fechnerian psychophysics (e.g. the entropy theory of Kenneth Norwich), and finally the probabilistic approach to perception. Along the way, concepts crucial to the study of sensory system are also introduced including: the identification and categorization of sensory stimuli, reaction time, decision-making processes, differentiation of stimuli, the limits of perceptibility, and large-scale integration of sensory information. The course will also consider applications of sensory research to pattern recognition, multimedia and biological computers. Course work will involve surveying the existing literature, doing a research project in small groups and a final examination. No biology background is required although some familiarity with the concept of probability is preferred.

ECE1776H - Computer Security, Cryptography and Privacy
The course introduces students to research topics on Computer Security. Students will be introduced to concepts in exploiting vulnerabilities, tools for detection of vulnerabilities, access control models, basic cryptography, and operating system, hardware, and network security.

ECE1777H - Computer Methods for Circuit Simulation
Circuit simulation is a commonly used technique for analysis and verification of circuits, ranging from integrated circuits and microelectronics to power distribution networks and power electronics. It is an established art and remains an important area of research. This course covers the theoretical background for modern circuit simulation, as well as the numerical techniques that are at the core of every circuit simulator.

ECE1778H - Creative Applications for Mobile Devices
Mobile and wearable devices have had a dramatic impact on a vast array of new areas including psychology, medicine, global health, music, banking, cooking, exploring, travel, shopping, and games. Many more things are possible, and so the purpose of this course is to encourage creativity in the creation of new applications of mobile, wearable devices, often together with online servers in an inter-disciplinary environment. The course is open to all graduate students at the University of Toronto, and is primarily a project-based course in which the goal is to produce a working app by the end of course. Projects will be done in groups of three: two students with programming skills are matched with one from a non-programming (a ‘specialist’) background. The project subject area must in the specialist’s field. Some of the projects are also driven by external (non-student) specialists recruited to participate in the course.
There will be three kinds of lectures:
1. On the capabilities of modern mobile devices at both a technical and lay level for non-specialists.
2. Case studies of innovative applications, linking to methods of innovating.
3. Project Proposals and Presentations
Grading will be on a four basic assignments (programming mobile devices for the programmers, and explorations of mobile ideas and case studies for the non-programmers) project proposals, interim presentations, and final project report and presentation. The course will support the use Google Android-based phones and Apple iOS-based phones only.
This course is a mixture of technical work, creativity in the medium of software mobile applications, communication and inter-disciplinary interaction.
See: http://www.eecg.utoronto.ca/~jayar/ece1778/ for a complete description of this course, and example projects from previous years.

ECE1779H - Introduction to Cloud Computing
Previous programming experience is a prerequisite for this course.
This course provides an introduction into the technologies behind cloud computing. A combination of lectures and hands-on programming assignments expose the student to the leading cloud computing paradigms and programming interfaces (e.g., EC2, Azure, App Engine). In addition, lectures provide an overview of the underlying technological concepts that make cloud computing possible (e.g., virtualization, scalability, fault tolerance, security).

ECE1780H - Advanced Mobile User Interfaces
With the rapid advancement of mobile computing, and the limited physical space available for keyboards/buttons on mobile device, there will be an ever greater need for novel types of mobile user interfaces including dynamic keyboards, computer-vision based interfaces, speech and audio processing (with Siri as one example), as well as other interface modalities. The goal of this course is to provide an overview of the information processing algorithms and design principles behind today’s most popular and tomorrow’s emerging mobile user interface systems.

ECE1781H - Dependable Software Systems
Prerequisites: ECE344H1 or equivalent
Modern computer systems have become tightly intertwined with our daily lives. However, they are failure-prone and difficult to manage and thus hardly dependable. Today, these problems dominate total cost of ownership of computer systems, and unfortunately they have no simple solutions. There is a realization that these problems cannot be decisively solved but are ongoing facts of life that must be dealt with regularly. To do so, systems should be designed to detect, isolate and recover from these problems.
This advanced graduate-level course focuses on dependability in software systems and examines current research that aims to address challenges caused by software and hardware bugs and software misconfiguration. Students are expected to read and critique recent research papers in operating systems that cover these areas. They are also expected to work on a research project and make class presentations.

ECE1782H - Programming Massively Parallel Multiprocessors and Heterogeneous Systems
The aim of the course is to provide hands-on experience in developing applications software for graphics processors with massively parallel computing resources. The target audiences of the course are those who want to develop exciting applications for these processors, as well as those who want to develop programming tools and future implementations for these processors. The initial part of the course focuses on popular programming interfaces for these processors. The course continues with a closer view of the internal organization of graphics processors and how it impacts performance. Finally, implementations of applications and algorithms on these processors will be discussed.

ECE1783H - Design Tradeoffs in Digital Systems
Skillful system architects ought to study the customers’ requirements and the target use-cases carefully and adequately before designing their algorithms/architectures. This course introduces the students to various design aspects of digital systems, and train them to deal with the existing tradeoffs, by influencing their designs to meet the target use-cases. Digital video codec system(s) are chosen to be the case-study to explain the concepts that are delivered throughout the course. The students will be introduced to the multi-dimensional design aspects of such a digital system, and will learn how technology leaders seek compromises between various important parameters such as throughput, power consumption, cost, programmability, time to market, as well as application-specific aspects such as quality, target bitrate, latency, and error resiliency. They will be trained to model different algorithms using high-level software and analyze the gains/losses of various tradeoffs. The course is intended to be self-contained, hence, reasonable preparation for most of the topics is provided. This is a hands-on type of course, so enrolled students should expect to roll up their sleeves and develop some high-level software code to solve interesting problems.

ECE1784H - Trustworthy Machine Learning
The deployment of machine learning in real-world systems calls for a set of complementary technologies that will ensure that machine learning is trustworthy. Here, the notion of trust is used in its broad meaning: the course covers different topics in emerging research areas related to the broader study of security and privacy in machine learning. Students will learn about attacks against computer systems leveraging machine learning, as well as defense techniques to mitigate such attacks.
The course assumes students already have a basic understanding of machine learning. Students will familiarize themselves with the emerging body of literature from different research communities investigating these questions. The class is designed to help students explore new research directions and applications. Most of the course readings will come from seminal papers in the field.

ECE1785H - Empirical Software Engineering
This course provides an overview and hands-on experience with a core of qualitative and quantitative empirical research methods, including interviews, qualitative coding, survey design, and large-scale mining and analysis of data. There will be extensive reading with occasional student presentations about the reading in class, weekly homework assignments, and a semester-long research project for which students must prepare in-class kickoff and final presentations as well as a final report. We will focus on software-engineering related research questions in readings and assignments. Students will mine and integrate data from and across online software repositories (e.g., GitHub and Stack Overflow) and employ a spectrum of data analysis techniques, ranging from statistical modeling to social network analysis. For the final research project, we encourage students to come up with a research question of interest to themselves. The delivery will be a research paper, and one or more empirical methods presented in class have to be part of the paper.

ECE1786H - Creative Applications of Natural Language Processing
Prerequisites: APS360H, CSC311H, ECE324H, ECE1513H, or equivalent
There has been truly remarkable progress in the capabilities of computers to process and generate language. This course covers Deep Learning approaches in Natural Language Processing (NLP), from word vectors to Transformers, including chatGPT and GPT-4. It is a project-based course that teaches the fundamentals of neural-network-based NLP and gives students the opportunity to pursue a unique project.
The course lecture material begins with the basics of word-level embeddings - their properties and training. These form the basis of neural-network-based classifiers employed to do classification of sentiment, named entity recognition and many other language tasks. A significant part of the course is about the Transformer architecture - its structure, training and how it generates language. This will include the use of the transformer as a classifier, but also as in generative mode, in which language is produced in response to input language. Much of the learning will be applied in four hands-on programming assignments and in a major project. Students will work in groups of 2 to propose a project of their own choosing that makes use of these capabilities. They will execute the project and both present it formally and write a report on it.

ECE1228H - Electromagnetic Theory
Prerequisites: ECE320 or ECE357.
This course is intended to benefit graduate students with interest in Electromagnetics and Photonics. It revisits and expands some of the more fundamental electromagnetic laws and theories. The course provides the students with the necessary foundation and specific knowledge of electromagnetic theory and the dynamics of wave propagation and interaction with materials and structures.ics covered in the course: Maxwell equations in differential and integral forms; constitutive relations; electric field and electrostatic potential, electric and magnetic polarization; boundary conditions, energy and power, material dispersion (electric response), material dispersion (magnetic response), conductors and conductivity, Multipole expansion, Maxwell-Helmholtz wave equations, solutions to Maxwell-Helmholtz wave equations, plane waves, polarization, reflection and transmission at interfaces, beam optics (time permitting), the other wave equation (Schrödinger wave equation), electron-photon analogies, waveguides, optical multilayers and transfer matrix method, dynamics of wave propagation (phase velocity, group velocity, energy velocity, forerunners), dispersive effects, introduction to waves in periodic structures, wave equation as operator, operator calculus and bases, anisotropic and bi-anisotropic medium, electromagnetic principles and theorems (duality, uniqueness, reciprocity theorem), and if time permits Green functions and Hamilton-Jacobi canonical equations.

ECE1229H - Advanced Antenna Theory
Prerequisite: ECE320 or ECE357.
This course deals with the analysis and design of a range of antennas. Topics addressed include: definitions of antenna parameters; vector potentials; solutions to the inhomogeneous wave equation; principles of duality and reciprocity; wire antennas; antenna arrays; phased arrays; synthesis techniques for discrete and continuous line sources; integral equations and solutions using the method of moments; field equivalence principle; aperture antennas; antenna measurement techniques; diffraction; horn antennas; reflector antennas; microstrip antennas; reflectarrays; electrically small antennas; and broadband antennas.

ECE1243H - Topics in EM Waves: Advanced EM Theory
The course builds on undergraduate electromagnetics to systematically develop advanced concepts in electromagnetic theory for engineering applications from dc to light. The following topics are covered. Maxwell’s equations, constitutive relations, wave equation; power flow, Poynting vector; field sources and representations, potentials; Green’s functions; plane waves: homogeneous and inhomogeneous waves, radiation from sources on a plane, plane wave transmission and reflection at boundaries, guided waves; rectangular waveguides and cavities: parallel-plate, rectangular and slab waveguides; wave equation in cylindrical coordinates; cylindrical waveguides (circular, coaxial waveguides and optical fibers); scattering from cylindrical objects and cylindrical waves; wave equation in spherical coordinates, spherical waves; electromagnetic theorems and concepts: duality, uniqueness, image theory, equivalence, reciprocity, induction.

ECE1252H - Introduction to Computational Electrodynamics
This course is an introduction to computational methods for the solution of operator problems in microwave, millimeter-wave and optical engineering. It presents a unified, field-theoretical approach to the derivation of numerical techniques, based on the application of the Method of Moments for the discretization of Maxwell’s equations. Emphasis is given in the Finite Difference Time Domain method, by providing a thorough study of such concepts as order of accuracy, stability, dispersion, convergence and error propagation. Theoretical derivation and practical implementation of source, material and absorbing boundary conditions is pursued. Higher order, multi-step, ADI and operator splitting methods are explained. Applications to wave propagation (including propagation in complex media and shock waves), antenna and circuit modeling are presented.

ECE1254H - Modeling of Multiphysics Systems
The course deals with the modeling and simulation of physical systems. It introduces the fundamental techniques to generate and solve the equations of a static or dynamic system. Special attention is devoted to complexity issues and to model order reduction methods, presented as a systematic way to simulate highly-complex systems with acceptable computational cost. Examples from multiple disciplines are considered, including electrical/electromagnetic engineering, structural mechanics, fluid-dynamics. Students are encouraged to work on a project related to their own research interests.ics:
Automatic generation of system equations (Tableau method, modified nodal analysis).
Solution of linear and nonlinear systems (LU decomposition, conjugate gradient method, sparse systems, Newton-Raphson method).
Solution of dynamical systems (Euler and trapezoidal rule, accuracy, stability).
Model order reduction of linear systems (proper orthogonal decomposition, Krylov methods, truncated balanced realization, stability/dissipativity enforcement).
Modeling from experimental data (system identification, the Vector Fitting algorithm, enforcement of stability and dissipativity).
If time permits, an overview of numerical methods to solve partial differential equations (Boundary element method, finite elements, FDTD).

ECE1255H - Special Topics in Electromagnetics: Integral Equation Methods for Computational Electromagnetism
Computational electromagnetism plays a crucial role in many important areas of scientific research and industrial developments, including antennas, radar, metamaterials, integrated circuit design, quantum computing, energy generation and transmission, optics, medical imaging, sensing, radioastronomy. This course focuses on integral equation methods for solving Maxwell’s equations, covering theory, implementation, applications and recent research developments. Electrostatic problems are first used to introduce students to fundamental concepts: integral formulations of Maxwell’s equations, the Green’s function, discretization and testing aspects, computation of singular integrals. After a review of direct and iterative methods to solve linear systems, we discuss the most prominent techniques for accelerating integral equation methods, including fast multipole algorithms, FFT-based approaches, hierarchical matrices. The general case of electrodynamics is considered next, including the choice of basis functions, modeling of excitations, postprocessing of results, modeling penetrable objects. Finally, selected topics from recent research will be presented.

ECE1256H - Microwave Circuits
This course outlines the principles of designing modern microwave and RF circuits. Signal-integrity issues in high-speed digital circuits are also examined. The wave equation, ideal transmission lines. Transients on transmission-lines. Planar transmission lines and introduction to MMIC’s. Designing with scattering parameters. Planar power dividers, directional couplers. Microwave filters. Solid-state microwave amplifiers, noise, diode-mixers, RF receiver chains, oscillators.

ECE532H1 - Digital Systems Design
Prerequisite: ECE342H1 or ECE352H1.
Advanced digital systems design concepts including project planning, design flows, embedded processors, hardware/software interfacing and interactions, software drivers, embedded operating systems, memory interfaces, system-level timing analysis, clocking and clock domains. A significant design project is undertaken and implemented on an FPGA development board.

ECE1336H - Semiconductor Physics
Prerequisites: ECE330H1 (Semiconductor Physics) or ECE350H1 (Physical Electronics).
A general course in solid state physics with specific emphasis on semiconductors; covers: crystal symmetry, crystal dynamics, dynamic properties of electrons in periodic lattice, elements of transport theory, excess carriers in semiconductors, semiconductor surfaces.

ECE1352H - Analog Circuit Design I
Exclusion: ECE430H1.
A course on CMOS Analog integrated circuit design, highlighting major analog building blocks and circuit techniques, and design and test considerations. Topics include MOSFET device modeling, noise analysis, op amp design and compensation, common-mode feedback, and biasing Course credit is not available to students who have taken ELE1802H.

ECE1365H - High Frequency Integrated Circuits
A design intensive overview of high-speed, RF, mm-wave monolithic, and silicon photonics integrated circuits for wireless, automotive radar sensors, and optical fiber systems with an emphasis on specific high-frequency circuit analysis and design methodologies, device-circuit topology interaction and optimization. Small-signal, noise, large-signal, high-frequency common-mode and differential-mode matching and stability, digital control of tuned circuits, methodologies for maximizing circuit bandwidth, high speed CML gate design, as well as layout and isolation techniques will be discussed. Students will participate in 6 take-home assignments on the analysis, modelling, schematic and layout design of mm-wave transistors, inductors, and circuits using advanced RF CMOS and SiGe BiCMOS technologies.

ECE1371H - Advanced Topics in Analog Circuits
Prerequisites: ECE512H1 (Analog Integrated Systems) or equivalent and ECE1352H (Analog Circuit Design I).
The focus of this course is on delta-sigma ADC design, with one lecture devoted to pipeline ADCs and SAR ADCs. Delta-sigma topics include low-order and high-order modulator design, discrete-time realization with switched-capacitor circuits, plus CMOS implementation of comparator, amplifier and realization of delta-sigma ADCs are covered in the latter half of the course.

ECE1373H - Digital Design for Systems-on-Chip
Prerequisites: Background in digital design using Verilog/VHDL.
An advanced digital hardware course dealing with the design of large digital systems implemented using FPGA and ASIC technologies. Topics include architecture design, design flows, HDL design, clocking and interfacing.

ECE1379H - Introduction to Compound Semiconductor Devices
Gallium Arsenide (GaAs) electronics and optoelectronics have emerged as leading contenders for ultra-high-speed electronic and photonic applications. Course content includes: physical properties of GaAs; carrier transport in GaAs; electronic and optical characteristics; homojunction and heterojunction transistors, lasers, detectors; superlattice and quantum well devices, integrated circuits. Course credit is not available to students who have taken ELE1829H.

ECE1387H - CAD for Digital Circuit Synthesis & Layout
Prerequisites: ECE451H1 (VLSI Systems) + programming experience or permission of instructor.
The approaches and algorithms for automatic synthesis, with a concentration on the back-end of the CAD flow. Topics covered will include: technology mapping, partitioning, placement, routing, timing analysis, and physical synthesis. The course will include experience with existing CAD tools and building new tools, and will pay special attention to synthesis issues as applied to Field-Programmable Gate Arrays. Course credit is not available to students who have taken ELE1837H.

ECE1388H - VLSI Design Methodology
The course introduces a design methodology for very-large-scale-integration (VLSI) circuits using advanced computer-aided-design (CAD) tools. The focus is on learning Cadence integrated circuit (IC) design tools to implement the IC design flow. The methodology includes the steps of: custom digital circuit design, automated digital circuit synthesis, digital and mixed-signal circuit simulation, custom layout design, and automated layout generation. The course includes several projects using a 65nm CMOS process: (1) transistor characterization, (2) full custom digital circuit and layout design, (3) automated digital circuit synthesis and layout place-and-route, and (4) team-based design of a full IC employing the methodology learned in the course.

ECE1390H - Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems: Wireless RF IC Design
This course addresses some of the most recent wireless transceiver circuit design techniques with particular emphasis on low-power applications.
Despite the course taking the majority of the examples from the area of low power applications several techniques and design strategies presented are also widely used for high data rate transceivers.
The course starts with an overview of the main tasks of a wireless transceiver. After that the metrics to characterize the different properties of the RF front-end are discussed. By following a top-down structure the course will discuss the frequency synthesizer architectures followed by the most established and promising transceivers architecture for low power applications.
In the second part of the course the main building blocks will be discussed: LNA, Mixers, PA, Oscillators and Filters and PLL implementations.

ECE1390H - Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems: Integrated Circuits for Sensors and Biomedical Devices
We are living in a transformative era where novel sensors and biomedical devices are revolutionizing our lives. It is estimated that over one trillion sensors are being used today around the world, connecting us through a massive internet of things (IoT). Integrated circuits (ICs) play an essential role in interfacing with these devices to realize their functionalities and fulfill their potential. This course will introduce the design methodology for key IC blocks for sensors and biomedical devices. We will discuss topics including energy-efficient subthreshold circuits model and design, low-noise instrumentational circuits, dynamic noise and offset cancellation techniques, low-power data converters, and system integration. We will cover IC design examples, such as biopotential amplifiers, CMOS image sensors, brain-machine interfaces (BMIs), DNA and protein detectors, MEMS sensor and actuator interfaces.
Note: biology or photonic knowledge is not required for this course. Relevant background will be given prior to the discussion of interfacing circuit design.

ECE1392H - Integrated Circuits for Digital Communications
Prerequisites: ECE530H1 (Analog Integrated Circuits) or ECE1352H (Analog Circuit Design I), ECE417H1 (Digital Communication), and ECE1388H (VLSI Design Methodology).
This course deals with integrated circuit implementations of digital communication. Topics include circuits for channel equalization (both at the transmitter and the receiver), clock and data recovery, coding and modulation schemes. Practical examples will be derived from wireline communication including chip-to-chip and backplane signaling.

ECE1394H - Technical Management of Modern IC Design
Prerequisites: ECE1388H (VLSI Design Methodology).
This course provides an overview of the design process of a large design in modern integrated circuit at the 65nm, 45nm, and 28nm node (depending on the availability of the corresponding design kit). A custom dual-port SRAM block, which can be embedded into an FPGA or other integrated circuit, is used as a design example throughout the course. Via the SRAM example, this course will focus on (1) the required tasks to design a robust circuit in a modern CMOS process, and (2) aspects of leading analysis and die cost estimation, behavioural modeling, logic verification, mixed-signal simulation, and task management of large designs.

ECE1395H - Power Semiconductor Devices & Applications
This course presents the electrical characteristics, thermal characteristics, packaging techniques and applications of state-of-the-art power semiconductor devices. In particular, the device structure and fabrication technology for power MOSFETs and IGBTs will be discussed extensively. The integration of these power devices to form Smart Power IC and HV CMOS technologies will also be introduced. An industrial standard Technology CAD tools from Crosslight Inc. (www.crosslight.com) will be used extensively to demonstrate the design, analysis, modelling and optimization of these power devices. Design projects targeting methods to achieve high breakdown voltage, low on-resistance, fast switching speed and high reliability/ruggedness will be carried out. In addition, the students will be also exposed to selection considerations for “off-the-shelf” devices that would meet the circuit or system level specifications.

ECE1396H - Analog Signal Processing Circuits
An overview of continuous-time and discrete-time signal processing techniques, and the analysis and design of the analog and mixed-signal circuit building blocks which are used to implement them in modern electronic systems. Topics covered are: (i) analysis, specification, simulation, and design of continuous-time filters with linear transconductors and op-amps, (ii) phase-domain model, noise model, and design methodology for low phase noise Phase Lock Loops and associated building blocks (VCO, phase-frequency detector, charge pump) (iii) Discrete-time signal analysis using z-transform, (iv) discrete-time filter design based on switched capacitors, and (v) fundamentals, specification, architectures, building blocks (comparator, THA) and characterization techniques for digital-to-analog and analog-to-digital converters. Cadence Analog Artist is used for lab assignments.

ECE1398H - VLSI Technology
Prerequisites: ECE331H1 (Analog Electronics) or ECE334H1 (Digital Electronics); ECE335H1 (Introduction to Quantum Mechanics) or equivalent.
The course deals with the technology and design of analog, digital and RF integrated circuits, including exposure to computer aided IC design tools at the semiconductor process, device, and circuit layout level. Topics include: IC fabrication review, MOS IC Process Modules and Components; RF (Bi) CMOS IC Process Modules and Components; Compact Modelling, Characterization, and Design Automation; Bipolar/CMOS Digital, Analog, and RF IC Building Blocks; Packaging and Yield. The labs will expose students to the major steps in the development of a multi-purpose (Bi) CMOS process.

ECE520H1 - Power Electronics
Focuses on power electronic converters utilized in applications ranging from low-power mobile devices to higher power applications such as electric vehicles, server farms, microgrids, and renewable energy systems. Concepts covered include the principles of efficient electrical energy processing (dc-dc, dc/ac, and ac/ac) through switch-mode energy conversion, converter loss analysis, large- and small-signal modeling of power electronic circuits and controller design.

ECE526H1 - Power System Protection and Automotion
This course presents the concepts of short-circuit fault analysis, protective relaying, and automation in power systems. The course starts by discussing the causes and types of short-circuit faults using real-world examples. The consequences of faults for different power system components are reviewed using event reports from field data. The method of symmetrical components for analyzing unbalanced three-phase systems is introduced. Analytical methods and computer-based approaches for deriving fault voltages and currents are discussed and the effect of system grounding during transient conditions, including faults, are introduced. Students also learn the concept of power system automation and its role in monitoring, protection, and control of modern power systems. Critical devices used in an automation system, such as breakers, relays, reclosers, capacitor bank controllers, and tap changer controllers are presented.

ECE1030H - Space Vector Theory and Control
Prerequisite:  ECE533H1 or equivalent
Please note: enrolment limited to 15 students
The course presents the general theory of dynamic modelling and control of the voltage source converter using space vectors. Applications include: active filters, FACTS (flexible AC Transmission Systems) controllers, VSC based HVDC systems, motor drives and most grid connected storage systems and renewable energy sources. Co-ordinate transforms necessary for the analysis of these devices are presented: space vectors, synchronous reference frame quantities, complex Fourier components and their relations. Converter controls are developed using both continuous time and discrete time space vector control concepts. In addition, state space modelling methods are employed for the study of interactions between a dc/ac converter and the network. The course typically includes an extensive laboratory component.

ECE1049H - Special Topics in Energy Systems: Power System Protection
This course reviews the fundamentals of short-circuit fault analysis for the power grid and discusses the expected features of a reliable protection system. The measurement devices used in protection systems are introduced, and their non-ideal features are discussed. This course introduces different types of overcurrent relays, their operating principles, coordination methods, and potential applications. Various methods for directional protection of the systems with bi-directional fault currents and the respective coordination strategies are explained. The course discusses the basic principles and coordination methods of distance protection for transmission lines. Different types of pilot protection schemes based on distance and directional relays are introduced. The course presents a detailed discussion on the operating principles of differential relaying for lines, transformers, motors, generators, and buses. Throughout the course, computer simulations of power systems are used to analyze protection functions.

ECE1049H - Special Topics in Energy Systems: Electric Vehicle Systems & Energy Management
This course offers a comprehensive study of electric vehicle (EV) systems, encompassing fundamental concepts, propulsion systems, charging systems, battery systems, power electronics, thermal management, and energy modeling. A significant laboratory component, involving real EV subsystem testing and integration, provides hands-on experience. The analysis carried out on measurements collected in the lab equips students with the tools to evaluate EV performance in both simulated and practical settings.

ECE1055H - Dynamics of HVdc/ac Transmission Systems
General aspects of high voltage ac/dc systems, principles of HVdc systems, HVdc control, harmonics and filters. Small-signal dynamics of HVdc/ac systems and eigen analysis, subsynchronous oscillations, interarea oscillations, harmonic instability. Large-signal dynamics in HVdc/ac systems. Introduction to the EMTP and the EMTDC software packages for the analysis and design of HVdc/ac systems. Introduction to multi-terminal HVdc systems. A basic background in power system analysis is strongly recommended.

ECE1059H - Special Topics in Energy Systems: Grid-forming Converters
Exclusion: ECE1055H
This course covers principals of (i) operation, (ii) modeling, (iii) controls, and (iv) dynamic behavior of grid-forming AC-DC power electronic converters for electric power grid applications. The focus is in on the 2-level voltage-sourced converter (VSC) and the modular multi-level converter (MMC) configurations. The subjects will be discussed in the context of bulk-power generation, transmission, and utilization and thus extensively inter-related to the controls and dynamics of legacy synchronous machines.
This course is an intermediate-level course and the required background includes:
undergraduate-level concepts of power electronics;
undergraduate-level concepts of systems control;
undergraduate-level concepts of power systems analysis;
graduate-level coverage of synchronous electric machines dynamics;
familiarity with software simulation platforms PSCAD and/or EMTP-RV.

ECE1085H - Power System Optimization
Explore techniques for the optimization of power system operations, including the following topics: state estimation, power system security, economic dispatch, power markets, and unit commitment.

ECE1092H - Smart Grid Case Studies
The course presents case studies of old and new Smart Grid applications in overhead electric power networks.  Each case study has components that include a history of the technology, a simplified treatment of the specific threat or opportunity, and the implementation issues in communications and sensor installation and maintenance.  The treatment makes use of relevant industrial standards including IEEE and IEC.

ECE1093H - Electrical Insulation Design and Coordination
The course organizes the voltage stresses that appear in high voltage systems in terms of amplitude, duration and occurrence. Suitable models for electrical breakdown and withstand are developed, with specific emphasis on outdoor insulation in adverse weather conditions.  The functions of surge protective devices, grounding and other overvoltage control measures will be discussed.  The treatment makes use of empirical models typical of relevant IEEE and IEC industrial standards.

ECE1094H - Power Systems Operations and Economics
This course covers modern developments in power systems from a mathematical perspective. The content includes: convex relaxations of optimal power flow; renewable variability and aggregation; duality, pricing and transmission rights; game theoretic modeling of market abuse; optimal control of energy storage; scheduling techniques for demand response. Prerequisite: ECE1505H or equivalent.

ECE1095H - Grounding and Bonding
Recommended Prerequisites: ECE359H1, ECE413H1
The course introduces the objectives, components and principles of grounding systems. Empirical models for risk of electrocution and perception are identified, using relevant IEEE and IEC industrial standards. Methods for characterizing soil resistivity are demonstrated and then related to electrical characteristics of typical service entrance, line and station ground grid electrodes. Much of the course focus is on 60-Hz analysis but the scope will include considerations for dc and lightning impulse performance, including testing of transfer impedance from lightning protection systems to victim circuits and components.

ECE1066H - Design of High-Frequency Switch-Mode Power Supplies (SMPS)
Students who have previously taken ECE533H1 must first check with the instructor before taking this course.
Design, analysis, and practical implementation of advanced controllers for high-frequency switch-mode power supplies (SMPS) are covered. The topics include: continuous and discrete time modeling of switching converters; current-program mode control, power factor correction rectifiers; practical implementation of analog and digital controllers. The course also has a laboratory portion, where a high-frequency switching converter and its controller are designed and fabricated.

ECE1068H - Introduction to Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC)
This course provides a fundamental understanding of the means by which electromagnetic interference arises. Techniques to reduce, overcome, or to protect sensitive electronic equipment from electromagnetic interference are covered. Course content: source of noise, modes of noise coupling, preventative measures, transmitters and receivers, grounding, surge protection. The course concludes with a case study. This course requires a basic background in circuit theory, fields and waves, and some knowledge in power electronics.

ECE1086H - Power Management for Photovoltaic Systems
This course provides a comprehensive overview of grid-connected and off-grid Photovoltaic (PV) technology with an emphasis on power electronics. The course is intended to accommodate students from a range of backgrounds with an interest in renewable energy. Course topics include: I. Core PV technology (types of PV cells, concentrating/multi-junction PV, I/V characteristics, electrical models, basic semiconductor principles). II. PV System Overview (Economics and trends, PV forecasting, shading effects). III. Power Electronic Converters for PV Systems (micro-inverters, micro-converters, multi-port dc-dc converters, maximum power point tracking techniques, efficiency optimization, digital control techniques, practical issues, semiconductor devices). Students may choose either a theoretical/simulation based final project or an experimental project. Students also have the opportunity to use the PV experimental platform on the roof of the Galbraith building.

ECE1228H - Electromagnetic Theory
Prerequisites: ECE320 or ECE357.
This course is intended to benefit graduate students with interest in Electromagnetics and Photonics. It revisits and expands some of the more fundamental electromagnetic laws and theories. The course provides the students with the necessary foundation and specific knowledge of electromagnetic theory and the dynamics of wave propagation and interaction with materials and structures.ics covered in the course: Maxwell equations in differential and integral forms; constitutive relations; electric field and electrostatic potential, electric and magnetic polarization; boundary conditions, energy and power, material dispersion (electric response), material dispersion (magnetic response), conductors and conductivity, Multipole expansion, Maxwell-Helmholtz wave equations, solutions to Maxwell-Helmholtz wave equations, plane waves, polarization, reflection and transmission at interfaces, beam optics (time permitting), the other wave equation (Schrödinger wave equation), electron-photon analogies, waveguides, optical multilayers and transfer matrix method, dynamics of wave propagation (phase velocity, group velocity, energy velocity, forerunners), dispersive effects, introduction to waves in periodic structures, wave equation as operator, operator calculus and bases, anisotropic and bi-anisotropic medium, electromagnetic principles and theorems (duality, uniqueness, reciprocity theorem), and if time permits Green functions and Hamilton-Jacobi canonical equations.

ECE1448H - Quantum Mechanics for Engineers
This course develops the theoretical background of quantum electronics and electro-optics and their applications to laser theory. The course is intended for engineering students with limited working knowledge of quantum mechanics. Topics include Schroedinger wave equation, quantum wells, hydrogen and multi-electron atoms, angular momentum and electron spin, harmonic oscillators and molecular structure, energy bands of solids, electric dipole moments, perturbation theory, and interaction of light with matter.

ECE1450H - Ultrafast Photonics
This course develops an in-depth understanding of ultrafast optical fundamentals and device technology. Topics to be covered include: short optical pulse generation; nonlinear optical effects; ultrafast optical phenomena; short optical pulse characterization techniques; pulse compression and temporal shaping; temporal and spatial solitons; and, as time permits, photonic devices and applications. The remainder of the course will be devoted to student presentations of papers on these topics in the current research literature. Students are expected to do substantialreading and study of the material in advance of the class lectures so that class discussions can focus on questions and issues raised by the students.

ECE1460H - Special Topics in Photonics: Advanced Semiconductor Lasers
An engineering-based course which covers advanced semiconductor diode lasers. Basic behavior in both the static and dynamic regimes of will be explained, and the noise phenomena in these lasers will be studied. Practical designs and structures will also be discussed in depth. The types of lasers this course will tackle include;
Distributed feedback lasers; high power performance, high-temperature operation, spatial and spectral hole burning, modulation speed
Vertical Cavity Surface emitting lasers; Thermal impedance, beam stabilization, uniformity across large arrays, ultra low threshold current realization
Multi-section Hybrid Lasers; tuneability, reliability, high output power, modulation.

ECE1461H - Advanced Laser Processing
This course provides the fundamentals of laser processing and advanced topics in application areas pertinent to photonics, electronics, medical, automotive, aerospace, and general manufacturing industries. Topics include cw to ultrafast laser systems, common approaches to beam delivery systems, and fundamentals of laser interactions with insulators, conductors, dielectrics, plasma, and soft tissues. Photothermal and photochemical processes and heat-flow models are discussed in the context of traditional applications such as welding, cutting, marking, etching and rapid-prototyping. Advanced and emerging application areas are photolithography, corneal sculpturing, refractive-index control in glasses, micromachining, semiconductor annealing, circuit-board processing, laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy, photonic-components, and surface texturing.

ECE1467H - Integrated Optical Circuit Design
The aim of this course is to equip graduate students with the skills necessary to carry out practical design exercises and produce integrated optical components. The course will introduce the numerical tools used to simulate waveguides, the material systems and parameters in common use and typical device configurations. Students will develop a practical understanding of basic integrated components, including: Y-junctions, directional couplers, interferometers and multi-mode interferometers (MMIs). The course will also consider typical approaches towards monolithic and hybrid integration.

ECE1473H - Micro and Nano Fabrication Technologies for Compound Semiconductors
This course is designed to provide the necessary background for graduate students to use semiconductor fabrication techniques to realize photonic and optoelectronic devices and circuits. The topics covered in this course include; Pattern definition techniques where photolithography, electron beam writing, nano-imprint and laser beam writing will be studied. Pattern transfer technologies including wet chemical etching, plasma induced etching, focused ion beam and chemical assisted ion beam etching will all be studied. Thin Film deposition techniques for optical coatings, etching masks, isolation will be also discussed. Metal-semiconductor interfaces including aspects of Schottky and Ohmic contacts will be explained. Elements of mask design will also be introduced. The course will aim to provide hands-on experience in the ECE clean room situated in the NIT.

ECE1475H - Bio-Photonics
This graduate course will review the field of Bio-photonics, and the interactions of light and biological matter. We will look at Bio-photonics from an engineering and physics perspective, and will review basic principles as well as the instrumentation (imaging and sensing systems) that are used in this field. This course is listed as a graduate course at the Electrical and Computer Engineering Dept. and the Institute of Biomedical Engineering. There are 12 two hour lecture sessions, a midterm (after ~ 9 sessions), and two seminar presentations by the students during the semester.

ECE1476H - LEDs and Solar Cells
This course covers the fundamental and applied aspects of light-to-electricity and electricity-to-light conversion devices. Upon completion of the course, students will gain practical knowledge on the working principles and operation of light-emitting diodes and solar cells. We will begin by introducing basics of solid state physics and quantum mechanics and apply them to analyze P-N junctions, diodes and heterostructures. Fundamentals of light-emitting diodes will then be covered, including physical and optical properties, band diagrams, and characterization of devices and materials. In a parallel analysis, the focus will then shift towards photovoltaics, covering thermodynamic limits, device architecture, characterization and modern material advances. Analytical and computational problem sets will allow students to apply the course material to the practical study of devices, using semiconductor device modeling tools such as SCAPS. Knowledge of quantum mechanics, solid-state physics, semiconductors, and familiarity with a numerical computing software is helpful, but not required.

ECE1477H - Optical Interconnects
This course will review the background, developments, and state-of-the-art progress for short-reach optical interconnects.  The course will examine the motivations for incorporating optical communication links into computing systems, such as datacenters, servers, and multi-core processors.  Topics to be discussed include the components for optical transmitters and receivers (e.g., silicon photonics, vertical cavity surface emitting lasers, distributed feedback lasers), electronic techniques to boost bandwidths, approaches to electronic-photonic integration, link budgets and impediments, single-mode vs. multi-mode fibre links, and optically-enabled system architectures.  Current industry trends as well as the challenges and opportunities of optical interconnect technologies will be emphasized throughout the course.

ECE1478H - Lasers and Detectors (formerly ECE525H1)
This course focuses on photonic components which generate or absorb light. Lasers: spontaneous and stimulated emission, gain and absorption, gain broadening; modulation dynamics, mode-locking, Q-switching; semiconductor lasers. Photodetectors: absorption, photo-generated currents, noise in detection.

ECE557H1 - Linear Control Theory
Prerequisite: ECE356H1.
Fundamentals of linear time-invariant control systems. State space modeling and control design, controllability, stabilization, pole placement controllers, observability, Kalman filters, observer design, optimal control, tracking controllers. Labs: real-time control experiments on design techniques. Course credit is not available for students who have taken ECE410H1.

ECE1619H - Linear Geometric Control Theory
Prerequisite: ECE410H1 or ECE557H1 or an equivalent State Space Control course.
The course presents a more advanced treatment of linear control theory via the geometric approach. The coverage roughly corresponds to the first six chapters of “Linear Multivariable Control: A Geometric Approach”, by W.M. Wonham. We adopt the abstract algebra approach of the text to study controllability, observability, controlled invariant subspaces, controllability subspaces, and controllability indices. These concepts are applied to solve the problems of stabilization, output stabilization, disturbance decoupling, and the restricted regulator problem. Areas of current research in linear geometric control will also be discussed.

ECE1635H - Special Topics in Control I: Adaptive Control and Reinforcement Learning
The course covers adaptive control and reinforcement learning for discrete-time deterministic linear systems. Topics include: discrete-time state space models; stability of discrete time systems; parameter adaptation laws; error models in adaptive control; persistent excitation; controllability and pole placement; observability and observers; classical regulation in discrete-time; adaptive regulation; dynamic programming; value and policy iteration methods; Q-learning; temporal difference learning. Labs involve control design using MATLAB. Graduate students will do a final project.

ECE1636H - Control of Discrete-Event Systems I
This course is an introduction to the control of discrete, asynchronous, nondeterministic systems like manufacturing systems, traffic systems, and certain communication systems. Architectural issues (modular, decentralized and hierarchical control) are emphasized. The theory is developed in an elementary framework of automata and formal languages, and is supported by a software package for creating applications. There are no special prerequisites.

ECE1637H - Control of Discrete-Event Systems II
Prerequisite: ECE1636.
This course is a continuation of ECE1636H, and is conducted on a seminar basis. Participants will present and discuss articles in the current literature, and complete a project that could lead into graduate research in the discrete-event system area. Topics recently examined include controlled Petri nets, min-max algebra, real-time control via timed-transition-models (TTMs), recursive process algebras, and state charts.

ECE1639H - Analysis and Control of Stochastic Systems I
This is the first course of a two-term sequence on stochastic systems designed to cover some of the basic results on estimation, identification, stochastic control and adaptive control. Topics include: stochastic processes and their descriptions, analysis of linear systems with random inputs; prediction and filtering theory: prediction for ARMAX systems, the Kalman filter and the Riccati equation; stochastic control methods based on dynamic programming; the LQG problem and the separation theorem; minimum variance control.

ECE1647H - Introduction to Nonlinear Control Systems
This course is a mathematical introduction to nonlinear control theory, a subject with roots in dynamical systems theory, mechanics, and differential geometry. The focus of this course is on the dynamical systems perspective. The material covered in this course finds application in fields as diverse as orbital mechanics and aerospace engineering, circuit theory, power systems, robotics, and mathematical biology, to name a few. The course is organized in four chapters, as follows.
Vector Fields and Dynamical Systems: Finite dimensional dynamical systems, vector fields, and their equivalence. Existence and uniqueness of solutions of ODEs.
Foundations of Dynamical Systems Theory: Invariant sets and their characterization by the Nagumo theorem. Limit sets as a tool to characterize the asymptotic behaviour of bounded orbits. Limit sets of two-dimensional systems: the Poincaré-Bendixson theorem. Poincaré theory of stability of closed orbits. Linearization of vector fields about equilibria. Linearization of vector fields about closed orbits.
Foundations of Stability Theory: Equilibrium stability and its characterization by means of Lyapunov’s theorem. Domain of attraction of an equilibrium. The Krasovskii-LaSalle invariance principle. Stability of LTI systems, and exponential stability of equilibria. Converse stability theorems.
Introduction to Nonlinear Stabilization: Control-Lyapunov functions. Parametrization of equilibrium stabilizers by CLFs (Artstein-Sontag theorem). Passive systems and passivity-based equilibrium stabilization. Passivity  of mechanical control systems. Port-Hamiltonian systems.

ECE1648H - Nonlinear Control Systems
Prerequisites to take this course are ECE1647F and ECE557H1 (or an advanced linear systems course).
This course is a continuation of ECE1647H. It covers the design and analysis of nonlinear control systems from a geometric perspective, with emphasis on properties of the system that do not change under coordinate transformations. Frequent references to linear system theory and linear geometric methods are made. A detailed list of topics will be posted on the course website (http://www.control.utoronto.ca/~maggiore/) before the course starts.

ECE1653H - Hybrid Systems and Control Applications
Prerequisites: ECE410 or ECE557H1 or equivalent.
The course explores design of control systems that achieve complex specifications. This is an emerging area in control theory that contrasts with traditional control design focused on stabilization and tracking. We introduce linear temporal logic (LTL) and show how LTL specifications capture a rich class of transient and steady-state behaviours of control systems. The LTL control problem is reduced to a hybrid control problem using ideas from computer science to obtain a design that includes high-level discrete algorithms and low-level continuous time controllers. The course covers the most important techniques and tools that come to play in this methodology, including triangulation, behaviour of affine systems on polytopes, the Reach Control Problem (RCP), and flow functions. We explore in depth control synthesis methods for the RCP based on affine, continuous state, and piecewise affine feedbacks. The techniques studied in the course come together to solve the problem of motion planning for a group of quadrocopters.

ECE1656H - Nonlinear Modeling and Analysis of Biological Systems
This course studies dynamical models used in biology and introduces the nonlinear dynamics tools necessary for their analysis. The first part reviews basic nonlinear dynamics concepts with illustrations on biological models like population growth and logistic models. The second part focuses on biochemical reactions and genetic regulation while the third part reviews and analyzes basic neuronal models. The last part of the course introduces specific nonlinear systems concepts (such as passivity, monotonicity, cooperativity)  for the quantitative study of biological networked systems (such as biochemical reaction networks and neuron populations). Selected topics will be covered independently via small research projects or paper reading and presented in workshop style meetings.

ECE1657H - Game Theory and Evolutionary Games
This course presents a mathematical treatment of classical and evolutionary game theory. Topics covered in classical game theory: matrix games, continuous games, Nash equilibrium (NE) solution, existence and uniqueness, best-response correspondence. Topics covered in evolutionary games:  evolutionary stable strategy concept, population games, replicator dynamics, relation to dynamic asymptotic stability. Learning in games: imitation dynamics, fictitious play and their relation to replicator dynamics. Applications to engineering: communication networks, multi-agent learning. There is no required textbook.  PDF course notes are available; the notes are self-contained and serve as a textbook. Weekly formal lectures based on the course notes.

ECE1658H - Geometric Nonlinear Control of Robotic Systems
Required backgound: This course has no formal prerequisites, but assumes knowledge of vector calculus and linear algebra. Ideally, the student taking this course will have taken an introductory course on nonlinear control theory, such as ECE1647F, and be familiar with the Lagrangian modelling of robots from a course like ECE470.
This course presents recent developments on control of underactuated mechanical systems, focusing on the notion of virtual constraint.
Traditionally, motion control problems in robotics are partitioned in two parts: motion planning and trajectory tracking. The motion planning algorithm converts the motion specification into reference signals for the robot joints. The trajectory tracker uses feedback control to make the robot joints track the reference signals. There is an emerging consensus in the academic community that this approach is inadequate for sophisticated motion control problems, in that reference signals impose a timing on the control loop which is unnatural and inherently non robust.
The virtual constraint technique does not rely on any reference signal, and does not impose any timing in the feedback loop. Motions are characterized implicitly through constraints that are enforced via feedback. Through judicious choice of the constraints, one may induce motions that are surprisingly natural and biologically plausible. For this reason, the virtual constraints technique has become a dominant paradigm in bipedal robot locomotion, and has the potential of becoming even more widespread in other area of robot locomotion.
The virtual constraint approach is geometric in nature. This course presents the required mathematical tools from differential geometry and surveys the basic results in this emergent research area. Topics covered will include:
– Differentiable manifolds and basic operations.
– Controlled invariant manifolds and zero dynamics of nonlinear control systems
– Euler-Lagrange robot models and models of impulsive impacts
– Virtual holonomic constraints (VHCs)
– Constrained dynamics resulting from VHCs, and conditions for existence of a Lagrangian structure
– Virtual constraint generators
– Stabilization of periodic orbits on the constraint manifold.
– Virtual constraints for walking robots

ECE1659H - Robust and Optimal Control
Prerequisites: ECE557H1 or equivalent
Convex optimization methods based on Linear Matrix Inequalities (LMIs) have dramatically expanded our ability to analyze and design complex multivariable control systems. This course explores material from the broad areas of robust and optimal control, with an emphasis on formulating systems analysis and controller design problems using LMIs. Topics include: historical context of robust control, fundamentals of optimization, linear matrix inequalities and semidefinite programming. Linear systems theory: Lyapunov inequalities, input-output performance criteria for dynamic systems, dissipative dynamical systems, and the generalized plant framework for optimal control. LMI solutions of H2 and H-Infinity state and output feedback control problems. Uncertain systems: linear and nonlinear uncertainty modelling, linear fractional representations, robust stability analysis. Time permitting: frequency-domain stability criteria, the KYP lemma, and introduction to integral quadratic constraints.

ECE1660H - Risk-Aware and Stochastic Control Theory with Learning
Prerequisites: ECE411 (or equivalent). It is recommended that students have taken rigorous mathematical courses in control theory and probability theory. Students may wish to take linear control theory (e.g., ECE 557) and random processes (e.g., ECE 537) concurrently. Courses from the mathematics department including Introduction to Real Analysis (MAT337) would be helpful.
The related areas of risk-aware control theory, stochastic control theory, and reinforcement learning are becoming ever more important in the modern age of data. In lectures, we focus on studying mathematical foundations and the pros and cons of existing methods to highlight research gaps (e.g., quality-of-approximation guarantees vs. scalability to high-dimensional systems). Lecture topics include introductions to measure theory, Borel spaces, continuous-state Markov decision processes (MDPs), finite-horizon MDP problems, stochastic safety analysis, solution methods via value iteration, risk functionals, risk-aware control theory, and parametric approximation methods. The exploration of additional topics and applications related to stochastic control and reinforcement learning is encouraged through literature critiques and research projects. This course is designed to practice and enhance creative thinking skills and to launch and inspire your research.

CSC2103HF - Software Architecture and Design
Concepts and state-of-the-art techniques in quality assessment of software engineering; quality attributes, formal specifications and their analysis; testing, verification, and validation.

CSC410HF - Software Architecture and Design
Concepts and state-of-the-art techniques in quality assessment of software engineering; quality attributes, formal specifications and their analysis; testing, verification, and validation.

CSC2104HF - Formal Methods of Program Design
Using mathematics to write error-free programs. Proving each refinement; identifying errors as they are made. Program development to meet specifications; modifications that preserve correctness. Useful for all programming; essential for programs that lives depend on. Basic logic, formal specifications, refinement. Conditional, sequential, parallel, interaction, probabilistic programming, and functional programming. 
Prerequisite: CSC236H1/ CSC240H1/ MAT309H1 
Recommended Preparation: CSC463H1

CSC465HF - Formal Methods of Program Design
Using mathematics to write error-free programs. Proving each refinement; identifying errors as they are made. Program development to meet specifications; modifications that preserve correctness. Useful for all programming; essential for programs that lives depend on. Basic logic, formal specifications, refinement. Conditional, sequential, parallel, interaction, probabilistic programming, and functional programming. 
Prerequisite: CSC236H1/ CSC240H1/ MAT309H1 
Recommended Preparation: CSC463H1

CSC2107 - Compilers and Interpreters
The structure of compilers, Programming language processing. Scanning based on regular expressions, Parsing using context free grammars, Semantic analysis (type and usage checking), Compiler dictionaries and tables. Runtime organization and storage allocation, code generation, optimization. Use of modern compiler building tools. Course project involves building a complete compiler.

CSC488 - Compilers and Interpreters
The structure of compilers, Programming language processing. Scanning based on regular expressions, Parsing using context free grammars, Semantic analysis (type and usage checking), Compiler dictionaries and tables. Runtime organization and storage allocation, code generation, optimization. Use of modern compiler building tools. Course project involves building a complete compiler.

CSC2125HF - Topics in Software Engineering: Software engineering for machine learning
The course discusses software engineering challenges and explores state of the art solutions for building software systems with significant machine learning or AI components.  Rather than modeling and learning itself, this course focuses on issues of design, implementation, operation, validation and assurance and how these interact with the ML perspective.  The course is a mix of lectures and student presentations.

CSC2125HF - Topics in Software Engineering: Types and Programming Languages
We will study programming languages viewed through the lens of their type structure. Half of the course will cover an introduction to programming language principles, and the other half will be reading group. After taking this course, students will be able to define programming languages via their type system and operational semantics, state and prove their properties, and appreciate the deep philosophical and mathematical underpinnings of programming language design.
Prerequisite: The introductory part has no formal prerequisites, but an exposure of various forms of mathematical induction will be helpful.

CSC2125HS - Topics in Software Engineering: Blockchain Technology and Engineering
This course will be half lecture and half reading group. We will cover techniques and software engineering challenges behind blockchain systems. Through the study of this course, students would learn the overall architecture of blockchain systems. The course would also dive into important sub-topics such as Proof-of-Work, consensus protocol, and smart contract VMs.
Prerequisite: We expect students who take this course have basic understanding of system engineering and system programming experience with C/C++/Go/Rust. Prior experience in distributed systems is strongly preferred.

CSC2130HS - Empirical Research Methods in Software Engineering 
This course provides an overview and hands-on experience with a core of qualitative and quantitative empirical research methods, including interviews, qualitative coding, survey design, and large-scale mining and analysis of data. There will be extensive reading with occasional student presentations about the reading in class, weekly homework assignments, and a semester-long research project for which students must prepare in-class kickoff and final presentations as well as a final report. 
We will focus on software-engineering related research questions in readings and assignments. Students will mine and integrate data from and across online software repositories (e.g., GitHub and Stack Overflow) and employ a spectrum of data analysis techniques, ranging from statistical modeling to social network analysis. 
For the final research project, we encourage students to come up with a research question of interest to themselves. The delivery will be a research paper, and one or more empirical methods presented in class have to be part of the paper.

ECE1785 - Empirical Research Methods in Software Engineering 
This course provides an overview and hands-on experience with a core of qualitative and quantitative empirical research methods, including interviews, qualitative coding, survey design, and large-scale mining and analysis of data. There will be extensive reading with occasional student presentations about the reading in class, weekly homework assignments, and a semester-long research project for which students must prepare in-class kickoff and final presentations as well as a final report. 
We will focus on software-engineering related research questions in readings and assignments. Students will mine and integrate data from and across online software repositories (e.g., GitHub and Stack Overflow) and employ a spectrum of data analysis techniques, ranging from statistical modeling to social network analysis. 
For the final research project, we encourage students to come up with a research question of interest to themselves. The delivery will be a research paper, and one or more empirical methods presented in class have to be part of the paper.

CSC2206HS - Computer Systems Modelling
The emphasis of the course is on models for systems with uncertainty. We study the properties of various models and discuss how they can be applied to analyze algorithm and system performance. This course is useful for students interested in the analysis of algorithms and systems with uncertainty that arise in computer systems, artificial intelligence, social networks, online markets etc. Concepts covered include Poisson, renewal, and Markov processes.
Prerequisite: Solid knowledge of basic probability theory.

CSC2208HS - Advanced Operating Systems
Principles of operating systems. The operating system as a control program and a resource allocator. Comparison of OS types: monolithic, microkernel, etc., as well as virtualization methods. Covers advanced topics in synchronization, mutual exclusion, and deadlock. Additional topics include performance analysis, process scheduling in a multiprocessor context, advanced memory management, file systems design and crash recovery, and protection. Fault tolerance will also be covered in the context of a distributed system.
Prerequisite: Requires advanced C systems programming skills and strong intro OS knowledge.

CSC469HS - Advanced Operating Systems
Principles of operating systems. The operating system as a control program and a resource allocator. Comparison of OS types: monolithic, microkernel, etc., as well as virtualization methods. Covers advanced topics in synchronization, mutual exclusion, and deadlock. Additional topics include performance analysis, process scheduling in a multiprocessor context, advanced memory management, file systems design and crash recovery, and protection. Fault tolerance will also be covered in the context of a distributed system.
Prerequisite: Requires advanced C systems programming skills and strong intro OS knowledge.

CSC2209HF - Computer Networking Systems
Computer networks with an emphasis on network programming and applications. An overview of networking basics: layering, naming, and addressing, packet switching fundamentals, socket programming, protocols, congestion control, routing, network security, wireless networks, multimedia, web 2.0, software-defined networking, and online social networks.
Prerequisite: CSC209H1, CSC258H1, CSC263H1/ CSC265H1, STA247H1/ STA255H1/ STA257H1/ ECO227Y1

CSC458HF - Computer Networking Systems
Computer networks with an emphasis on network programming and applications. An overview of networking basics: layering, naming, and addressing, packet switching fundamentals, socket programming, protocols, congestion control, routing, network security, wireless networks, multimedia, web 2.0, software-defined networking, and online social networks.
Prerequisite: CSC209H1, CSC258H1, CSC263H1/ CSC265H1, STA247H1/ STA255H1/ STA257H1/ ECO227Y1

CSC2221HF - Introduction to Distributed Computing
This course studies fundamental models and problems in distributed computing with an emphasis on synchronization and fault tolerance. Algorithms and impossibility results will both be considered. 
Prerequisite: A course in algorithm design and analysis.

CSC2226HS - Topics in Verification: Theory of Concurrency
The goal of this course will be to build background in intersection of verification and automata theory, and a little bit of program synthesis towards the end. We will do this by covering seminal papers introducing all the key results. 
There will be a special focus on:
Verification of recursive programs and the literature on visible pushdown languages
Verification of concurrent programs, and the literature on trace theory
Tree automata and their use in both verification and synthesis
We will assume knowledge of:
Basic automata theory.
Temporal Logics (LTL/CTL), and their corresponding model checking algorithms
at least elementary understanding of automata on infinite words (as it related to LTL model checking)
to be able to proceed with building graduate-level knowledge in this course.

CSC2227HS - Topics in the Design and Implementation of Operating Systems
Seminar and discussion of a number of topics in operating system design and implementation, based on a collection of papers as class reading. Emphasis on multiprocessor and distributed operating systems. Case studies of contemporary operating systems. An independent course project and an oral student presentation is required. 
Prerequisites: Introductory Operating Systems (CSC369 or equivalent), CSC2208/CSC469 recommended.

CSC2229HS - Topics in Computer Networks: Cloud Computing
Cloud computing underpins today's largest online services. Enabling cloud computing are hyperscale data centers where data is stored, processed, and moved at unprecedented scales. Networks in and between data centers are one of the most fundamental components in clouds---they connect millions of servers to provide computing as a utility. In this seminar course, we first introduce cloud networks and then delve into the design principles and cutting-edge advancements of these networks. Specifically, we will discuss classic papers that have stood the test of time and recent groundbreaking research published in top networking conferences, such as SIGCOMM and NSDI.
Prerequisites: CSC458/2209

CSC2231HF - Topics in Computer Systems: Secure Computer Systems and Hardware
In recent years, numerous hardware vulnerabilities have surfaced leaving software systems exposed to exploitation. Notable examples include processor speculation attacks like Spectre and Meltdown, Cache Side-Channel attacks, and Rowhammer attacks. These attacks enable malicious software to extract sensitive data from systems, tamper critical data, and even seize control of entire systems. This course will discuss various aspects of hardware and systems security. Students will gain a thorough understanding of micro-architectural attacks, such as Spectre, Cache Side-Channels, and Rowhammer, while also exploring emerging defense mechanisms designed to thwart these exploits. The course will also cover classic topics in hardware and systems security like trusted execution environments, memory safety and other topics. This course is intended for graduate and advanced undergraduate-level students who have some background in hardware or systems. Students with a software/systems background will gain insights into the influence of micro-architectural designs on system security. Conversely, students with a hardware background will explore the techniques employed by malicious software to reverse-engineer hardware and compromise systems. By bridging these perspectives, students will develop a comprehensive understanding of secure computer architecture. The course lecture material will be derived from the research papers in system security conferences (e.g., IEEE S&P, USENIX Security) and computer architecture conferences (e.g., ISCA, MICRO, HPCA, ASPLOS). The course will also include hands-on assignments where students will learn to construct micro-architectural attacks on real systems. Students will also undertake a mini-research project to hone their expertise in secure computer architecture. 
Prerequisites: Undergraduate Computer Organization (e.g., CSC258, CSC385 or equivalent), Introductory Operating Systems (CSC369 or equivalent).

CSC2231HS - Topics in Computer Systems: Visual and Mobile Computing Systems
Visual computing encompasses many transformative tasks in a wide range of applications including 2D/3D graphics, image processing, image understanding, and computational photography. These applications have driven many of the latest innovations in the design of computer systems, ranging from smartphones and AR/VR headsets, to autonomous robots and large-scale data centers. 
This course will summarize key concepts in visual computing including image processing, image/video understanding with DNNs, diffusion models, neural implicit representations, and various robotics tasks. This course will then cover key principles, ideas, techniques, and challenges associated with the design of high performance processors and software frameworks that serve to accelerate visual computing applications. This course will cover how these techniques are applied in modern robotics, autonomous vehicles, computational photography, and in architectures such as TPUs, GPUs, and FPGAs. 
This course is intended for graduate and advanced undergraduate-level students, and will start with basic principles and then cover the latest research. For ML, vision, or graphics students, you will gain an understanding of the difference between hardware architectures (e.g., TPUs, GPUs, and FGPAs), the principles behind software frameworks (e.g., TensorFlow, Halide, CUDA), etc. and the tradeoffs/techniques in writing high-performance algorithms for visual computing applications. For systems students, this course will serve as an introduction to cutting-edge vision, graphics, DL, robotics applications and their optimization.
This course will include lectures, interactive discussions of state-of-art research, industry guest lectures, and a research project. 
Prerequisites: No prerequisites required and the course does not assume any prior background on any of the topics being covered.

CSC2233HF - Topics in Storage Systems
Over 90% of all new information produced in the world is being stored on digital storage systems and storage systems are the backbone of many enterprises. In particular in today's data-driven world, the success of many enterprises depends on their ability to efficiently and reliably storage large amounts of data. Storage systems often dominate overall systems performance and the exponentially growing need for data capacity and access speed makes this an important and exciting area of research. In this class you will learn about the foundations as well as the most recent advances in storage systems. You will also perform a cutting-edge mini-research project, where you design, build and/or evaluate a system. This year's offering of the course will pay special attention to how machine learning can be used to build better computer systems.

CSC2305H/CSC466H - Numerical Methods for Optimization Problems
Numerical methods for unconstrained optimization problems, in particular line search methods and trust region methods. Topics include steepest descent, Newton’s method, quasi-Newton methods, conjugate gradient methods and techniques for large problems. This course will normally be offered every other year. 
Prerequisites: CSC336H1, MAT221H1/ MAT223H1/ MAT240H1, MAT235Y1/ MAT237Y1/ MAT257Y1

CSC2321HF - Matrix Calculations
Review the basic concepts in the numerical solution of linear systems, introduce state-of-the-art developments in numerical linear algebra/PDEs, develop and study efficient linear solvers, implement the above solvers as software, use existing software (routines and higher level environments), study the performance of methods and software. Topics among basic iterative methods, acceleration, perconditioning, multigrid, domain decomposition, fast Fourier transform linear solvers. 
Prerequisites: Calculus, numerical linear algebra, interpolation, some knowledge of PDEs, proficiency in a programming language, preferably MATLAB or FORTRAN

CSC2401HS - Introduction to Computational Complexity
This is a graduate introductory level course in computational complexity theory. It is appropriate for all graduate students in Computer Science. The main part of the course will be an introduction to complexity theory where we will discuss uniform and non-uniform models of computation, time and space complexity classes, complexity hierarchies, reductions and completeness, randomization in computation, approximation algorithms, and lower bound methods. 
In the latter part of the course, we will discuss several new results in complexity theory. Such advanced topics may include: Hastad’s famous switching lemma and its applications, including lower bounds for constant-depth circuits, better upper bounds for satisfiability, and connections to learning theory; communication complexity and its applications; NP, coNP and propositional proof complexity.

CSC2412HF - Algorithms for Private Data Analysis
In this course we will study individual privacy in data analysis from a rigorous theoretical perspective. We will focus on Differential Privacy: a recent approach to achieving strong provable privacy protection guarantees in the analysis of sensitive data. Informally, a data analysis algorithm is differentially private if changing the data of a single individual changes the output distribution of the algorithm only slightly. This guarantee ensures that the privacy risk to any individual increases only slightly by participating in data collection. Our focus will be on the design of efficient differentially private algorithms. In the process, we will learn about fascinating connections between differential privacy and game theory, statistics, learning theory, and geometry. While we focus on the algorithms, there will be proofs: it is important to prove formally that an algorithm provides privacy: this is not something that can be verified experimentally. Most proofs are simple, but the course does require mathematical maturity and a background in probability theory, and the design and analysis of algorithms.

CSC2415HS - Advanced Topics in the Theory of Distributed Computing
Advanced course on distributed computing, aimed at students who wish to explore in depth a topic in this area. It will be run largely as a research seminar course. Each student will pick a topic from a list suggested by the instructors or a topic of the student’s own choosing approved by the instructors. The student will then study the relevant literature, and will eventually present the subject to the class in one or more 2-3 hour sessions. A course in theory of distributed computing, such as CSC2221. 
People with good backgrounds in complexity theory are welcome to take the course, provided they are willing to do some background reading.

CSC2420HF - Algorithm Design, Analysis and Theory
This course serves as a foundational course, appropriate for students in computer science, computer engineering, and mathematics. However, the course should also be of interest to “theory students” looking for research topics. We will begin with topics normally discussed in undergraduate courses such as our CSC373 using some standard less standard examples and also discussing some precise models for standard algorithmic paradigms such as greedy, local search and dynamic programming algorithms. We will be discussing topics such as algorithmic mechanism design, the random order model and other stochastic optimization models for combinatorial problems, randomized algorthims, LP rounding, primal dual algorithms, and a brief introduction to online convex optimization.

CSC2421HS - Topics in Algorithms: Mathematical Foundations of Algorithmic Fairness
This course will survey the literature on algorithmic fairness within the broader umbrella of ethical algorithm design. Specifically, we will study mathematical definitions of fairness that apply to a wide range of decision-making settings from voting to resource allocation to machine learning, and algorithms and AI systems that provably (often approximately) satisfy such fairness notions. The course will be theoretical in nature and will assume a strong background in algorithm design, formal proof techniques, and probability theory/statistics as well as working knowledge of complexity theory. No prior background in AI or algorithmic fairness will be assumed.

CSC2426HF - Fundamentals of Cryptography
Rigorous definitions of security for pseudo-random generators, shared private-key cryptosystems, public-key cryptosystems, and digital signature schemes. Methods (including number-theoretic conjectures) for constructing secure cryptographic primitives. Methods for using secure primitives to construct secure systems.

CSC2429HF - Topics in Theory of Computation: Introduction to Quantum Information Theory
This course provides a rigorous introduction to quantum information theory designed for graduate students in computer science, physics or mathematics.  The aim of the course is to provide a mathematical understanding of how to quantify information in quantum mechanical systems and to understand the limitations that quantum mechanics places on our abilities to transmit information between parties.  This understanding lays the mathematical foundation for technologies such as quantum cryptography and quantum computing and the foundations of physics.  Topics covered include introduction to quantum states and channels, quantum and classical Shannon theory, bipartite entanglement theory, state and channel distinguishability,  quantum cryptography and two player quantum games such as the CHSH game.  No prior knowledge of quantum physics or computing will be assumed in this course.
Textbook: The theory of quantum information, John Watrous, 2018
Prerequisite: Strong familiarity with linear algebra and formal proof.  CSC2332 is not a prerequisite but may be helpful.

CSC2429HF - Topics in Theory of Computation: Finite Fields
This course will cover some important classical and modern themes in the study of finite fields. 
There will be an emphasis on explicit constructions of pseudorandom and extremal objects, as well as on algorithmic techniques.
Topics include:
Solutions of equations
Pseudorandomness
Exponential sums and Fourier techniques
Algebraic curves over finite fields, the Weil theorems
Additive combinatorics and the sum-product phenomenon
Applications to combinatorics, theoretical computer science and number theory

MAT1304HF - Topics in Theory of Computation: Finite Fields
This course will cover some important classical and modern themes in the study of finite fields. 
There will be an emphasis on explicit constructions of pseudorandom and extremal objects, as well as on algorithmic techniques.
Topics include:
Solutions of equations
Pseudorandomness
Exponential sums and Fourier techniques
Algebraic curves over finite fields, the Weil theorems
Additive combinatorics and the sum-product phenomenon
Applications to combinatorics, theoretical computer science and number theory

CSC2429HS - Topics in Theory of Computation: Derandomization and its connections in complexity theory, interactive proof systems, and cryptography
Randomized algorithms are everywhere in computer science, and they're crucial for areas such as cryptography and learning. Why then do theorists believe that when solving decision problems, random algorithmic choices can always be efficiently replaced by carefully planned deterministic choices? More generally, can we simulate algorithmic randomness in efficient ways, and if so -- how?
In this course we'll dive into the BPP = P conjecture, which is one of the main conjectures in complexity theory. Starting from the definitions and classical results from the 1990s, we'll make our way to very recent research, passing through areas such as circuit complexity, error-correcting codes, interactive proof systems, cryptography, and more. Our goal will be to understand the conjecture and its theoretical basis, to learn about its recent strengthenings and new approaches to studying it, and to get introduced to its broader implications on computer science.
The course will assume basic background in complexity theory, which means that should have studied at least one course that includes complexity content (e.g., CSCC63 or CSC463 or CSC2401). If you're interested in the course but are unsure whether or not you have the necessary prerequisites, you're more than welcome to ask the instructor.

CSC2431HS - Topics in Computational Biology 
This course will introduce students to the variety of ways that computational methods are utilized in modern medicine. The topics will include the use of probabilistic and deterministic techniques in the analysis of genomic data, machine learning and NLP to analyze medical texts, HCI considerations for medical software, as well as other topics. While we will not cover any particular CS research area in depth, the students are expected to have a broad computational background to be able to read research literature in a variety of subject areas, as well as the ability to do independent exploration of topics in medicine.

CSC2501HF - Computational Linguistics
Computational linguistics and the processing of language by computer. Topics include: language models; context-free grammars; chart parsing, statistical parsing; semantics and semantic interpretation; ambiguity resolution techniques; reference resolution. Emphasis on statistical learning methods for lexical, syntactic, and semantic knowledge.
Prerequisite: STA247H1/ STA255H1/ STA257H1 or familiarity with basic probability theory, including Bayes’s theorem; CSC207H1/ CSC209H1 or proficiency in Python and software development.

CSC485HF - Computational Linguistics
Computational linguistics and the processing of language by computer. Topics include: language models; context-free grammars; chart parsing, statistical parsing; semantics and semantic interpretation; ambiguity resolution techniques; reference resolution. Emphasis on statistical learning methods for lexical, syntactic, and semantic knowledge.
Prerequisite: STA247H1/ STA255H1/ STA257H1 or familiarity with basic probability theory, including Bayes’s theorem; CSC207H1/ CSC209H1 or proficiency in Python and software development.

CSC2506HS - Probabilistic Learning and Reasoning
An introduction to probability as a means of representing and reasoning with uncertain knowledge. Qualitative and quantitative specification of probability distributions using probabilistic graphical models. Algorithms for inference and probabilistic reasoning with graphical models. Statistical approaches and algorithms for learning probability models from empirical data. Applications of these models in artificial intelligence and machine learning.
Prerequisite: CSC411H1/STA314H1

CSC412HS - Probabilistic Learning and Reasoning
An introduction to probability as a means of representing and reasoning with uncertain knowledge. Qualitative and quantitative specification of probability distributions using probabilistic graphical models. Algorithms for inference and probabilistic reasoning with graphical models. Statistical approaches and algorithms for learning probability models from empirical data. Applications of these models in artificial intelligence and machine learning.
Prerequisite: CSC411H1/STA314H1

CSC2508HF - Advanced Data Systems
This is a graduate topic course that assumes familiarity with database management systems and database internals. The purpose of the course is to expose students in research topics and fundamental techniques at the intersection of Machine Learning and data management. We will cover topics related to storage and indexing of high dimensional data as well as query processing and optimization over large data repositories. We will also cover topics related to data preparation for machine learning tasks and focus on certain advanced applications of machine learning including video query processing and data programming.

CSC2511HS - Natural Language Computing
Introduction to techniques involving natural language and speech in applications such as intelligent Web searching; speech recognition and synthesis; and multi-lingual systems including machine translation. N-grams, POS-tagging, semantic distance metrics, neural models of language, corpus analysis. Python and other software.
Prerequisite: CSC207H1/ CSC209H1; STA247H1/ STA255H1/ STA257H1

CSC401H1 - Natural Language Computing
Introduction to techniques involving natural language and speech in applications such as intelligent Web searching; speech recognition and synthesis; and multi-lingual systems including machine translation. N-grams, POS-tagging, semantic distance metrics, neural models of language, corpus analysis. Python and other software.
Prerequisite: CSC207H1/ CSC209H1; STA247H1/ STA255H1/ STA257H1

CSC2512HF - Advanced Propositional Reasoning
Many problems in Computer Science can be represented as instances of propositional reasoning problems. For example, any problem in NP can be represented as a SAT problem (Boolean Satisfiability) since SAT is complete for the class NP. For many problems, their representation in SAT is very natural, and more importantly, can often be effectively solved by a general purpose SAT solver. This means that instead of developing and implementing a problem specific algorithm, we can often solve our problems by the much simpler device of encoding them into SAT and then using a SAT solver. Surprisingly, the SAT solver can often outperform problem specific algorithms. 
In this course you will be introduced to the basic algorithms that are used to SAT and other types of propositional reasoning problems. In addition, we will discuss various encoding techniques for translating various problems into SAT–the encoding used can have a dramatic effect on performance. Besides problems that can be encoded into SAT we often need to deal problems that require some form of optimization, or some form of quantification (e.g., to reason about two person games). Such problems can be encoded as MAXSAT problems, or QBF problems. We will also cover algorithms for solving these kinds of propositional problems. 
The aim of the course is to provide you with the background needed to exploit modern SAT–MAXSAT–QBF solvers in your own work. Knowledge of the basics of propositional logic; be familiar and comfortable with programming, data structures and algorithms. 

CSC2514H - Human-Computer Interaction
Understanding human behaviour as it applies to user interfaces: work activity analysis, observational techniques, questionnaire administration, and unobtrusive measures. Operating parameters of the human cognitive system, task analysis and cognitive modelling techniques and their application to designing interfaces. Interface representations and prototyping tools. Cognitive walkthroughs, usability studies and verbal protocol analysis. Case studies of specific user interfaces. 
Prerequisites: CSC318H1; STA247H1/ STA255H1/ STA257H1; CSC209H1/ proficiency C++ or Java 
Recommended Preparation: A course in PSY; CSC209H1; (STA248H1/ STA250H1/ STA261H1)/(PSY201H1)

CSC428H1 - Human-Computer Interaction
Understanding human behaviour as it applies to user interfaces: work activity analysis, observational techniques, questionnaire administration, and unobtrusive measures. Operating parameters of the human cognitive system, task analysis and cognitive modelling techniques and their application to designing interfaces. Interface representations and prototyping tools. Cognitive walkthroughs, usability studies and verbal protocol analysis. Case studies of specific user interfaces. 
Prerequisites: CSC318H1; STA247H1/ STA255H1/ STA257H1; CSC209H1/ proficiency C++ or Java 
Recommended Preparation: A course in PSY; CSC209H1; (STA248H1/ STA250H1/ STA261H1)/(PSY201H1)

CSC2516HS - Neural Networks and Deep Learning
It is very hard to hand-design programs to solve many real-world problems, e.g. distinguishing images of cats vs. dogs. Machine learning algorithms allow computers to learn from example data, and produce a program that does the job. Neural networks are a class of machine learning algorithms originally inspired by the brain, but which have recently have seen a lot of success at practical applications. They’re at the heart of production systems at companies like Google and Facebook for image processing, speech-to-text, and language understanding. This course gives an overview of both the foundational ideas and the recent advances in neural net algorithms.

CSC413H1 - Neural Networks and Deep Learning
It is very hard to hand-design programs to solve many real-world problems, e.g. distinguishing images of cats vs. dogs. Machine learning algorithms allow computers to learn from example data, and produce a program that does the job. Neural networks are a class of machine learning algorithms originally inspired by the brain, but which have recently have seen a lot of success at practical applications. They’re at the heart of production systems at companies like Google and Facebook for image processing, speech-to-text, and language understanding. This course gives an overview of both the foundational ideas and the recent advances in neural net algorithms.

CSC2518HS - Spoken Language Processing
An introduction to working with speech in natural language processing systems. Topics include: articulatory and acoustic phonetics, prosody and information structure, introduction to digital signal processing of speech, automated speech recognition, text-to-speech synthesis, language models, dialogue modelling and dialogue systems.

CSC2521HF - Topics in Computer Graphics: Seminar on Physics-based Animation
This course is designed to introduce students to the field of physics-based animation by exposing them to the underlying mathematical and algorithmic techniques required to understand and develop efficient numerical simulations of physical phenomena such as rigid bodies, deformable bodies and fluids. Students should have a strong background in Linear Algebra and Multivariate Calculus. Familiarity with Convex Optimization and Differential Geometry is a plus, but not required.
In physics-based animation we will learn how to develop algorithms that produce visually compelling representations of physical systems. We will learn the underlying continuous mathematics describing the motion of physical objects, explore how to discretize them and how to solve the resulting discrete equations quickly and robustly. Topics covered include rigid body simulation, elasticity simulation, cloth simulation, collision detection and resolution and fluid simulation. Along the way, we will explore the underlying mathematics of ordinary differential equations, discrete time integration, finite element methods and more. 

CSC2521HF - Topics in Computer Graphics: 3D Facial Modeling and Animation
Human ability to communicate via the subtlest of facial nuance makes animating an engaging anthropomorphic face arguably the most challenging aspect of character animation. The greater the rendered realism, the smaller the margin for animated imperfection before the character irreversibly loses credibility. This course provides instruction on the 3D modeling and animation of faces. The course will be conducted as a mix of instructor and guest lectures, student paper and project presentations. The main pre-requisite for this course is a basic graduate level CS background and a desire to be visually creative. The course will make significant use of Maya and possibly Unreal, so some familiarity working with 3D modeling/animation software and game engines is a plus.

CSC2521HS - Topics in Computer Graphics: Seminar in Geometry and Animation (CANCELLED)
This course will take a deep look at a broad collection of seminal papers in computer graphics, focusing on topics in geometry processing and computer animation. The course is structured around weekly paper readings. All students will read the same paper each week, but each student will have a unique, rotating role. This role defines the lens through which they read the paper and determines what they prepare for the group in-class discussion. Students will obtain a thorough understanding of the chosen papers and will develop their paper reading, literature review and prototyping skills. Prior exposure to computer graphics or geometry processing is suggested but not required. Students should have taken courses in Linear Algebra and Computer Programming. 
Recommended but not required: CSC418/CSC2504/CSC2520/CSC419

CSC2524HF - Using LLMs & GPT for Ubiquitous Computing
In this course, we will examine uses of LLMs and GPT in ubiquitous computing applications. This course is targeting students interested in designing and evaluating applications that leverage AI technologies. Student marks will be comprised of their grades for a term project, student presentation and participation in class discussion. Students will conduct weekly readings, with student led presentations and discussions each week. Students will work on a term project which explores novel applications of AI technologies.

CSC2524HS - Topics in Interactive Computing: Large Language Models for Intelligent User Interfaces
In this course we will examine Human Computer Interaction research on the use of Large Language Models (LLMs) for the development of intelligent user interfaces. We will look at how LLMs can enhance interactive systems across three specific usage domains: Education, Human-Robot Interaction, and Creativity Support Tools. This course is targeting students wishing to design new interactive systems that leverage AI technologies, or students interested in conducting studies to explore how LLMs will impact the ways we interact with technology. Students will conduct weekly readings, with student led presentations and discussions each week. A final project will make up most of the grade, while student presentation skills and participation in class and in readings will also be emphasized.

CSC2525H - Research Topics in Database Management: Database System Technology
This course covers the algorithms and data structures that form the bedrock of modern data management systems. We will first discuss modern hardware and how it motivates the design of database systems. We will then delve deeply into buffer pool management, indexing (B-trees, LSM-trees & circular logs), counting sketches, membership filters, query operators, query optimization, concurrency control, transaction management, recovery algorithms, data layouts (row-stores vs. column-stores). Students will implement a mini-database system from the ground up. 

CSC443H - Research Topics in Database Management: Database System Technology
This course covers the algorithms and data structures that form the bedrock of modern data management systems. We will first discuss modern hardware and how it motivates the design of database systems. We will then delve deeply into buffer pool management, indexing (B-trees, LSM-trees & circular logs), counting sketches, membership filters, query operators, query optimization, concurrency control, transaction management, recovery algorithms, data layouts (row-stores vs. column-stores). Students will implement a mini-database system from the ground up. 

CSC2525 - Research Topics in Database Management: Bigger, Faster, and Stronger Systems
This course covers advanced research topics in the design of big database management systems. We will explore hardware topics including SSDs, non-volatile memory, shingled HDDs, NUMA, CPU pipelining, SIMD, etc. We will discuss the limits of traditional relational database systems and emerging database architectures such as NoSQL, NewSQL, KV-stores, stream processors, and graph databases. We will delve deeply into state-of-the-art data organization techniques such as indexing, compression, data sketching, and especially set-membership filtering. This is a more advanced course than CSC2525H/CSC443H - Research Topics in Database Management: Database System Technology.

CSC2526HF - Topics in Ubiquitous Computing: Seminar on Mobile Health
This course will examine the growing prominence of mobile health over the past twenty years. After briefly discussing various definitions of mobile health, we will focus our attention on how people are using the sensors embedded in ubiquitous and novel devices to capture indicators of physical and mental health. More specifically, we will study how sensors are being used to measure physiological signals, psychomotor function, and disease-specific symptoms. We will also explore the how human factors play an important role in these technologies. 
This course requires an undergraduate-level understanding of machine learning and programming, although familiarity with computer vision, signal processing, and human-computer interaction will also be beneficial. Beyond weekly readings and an in-class presentation, students will be expected to complete and present a course project at the end of the term.

CSC2527HS - Business of Software
This course introduces you to the nature, structure, and dynamics of the contemporary software industry. It focuses on the key factors involved in ideating, hypothesizing, validating, and executing a viable and investable/return driven business model to launch a sustainable, scalable and profitable tech-based (software and/or hardware) business venture as a company founder or as an employee of an established company. The course will be a team effort of four students per team. The scope of the course does not include not-for-profit or charity business models.
Course objectives include a meaningful understanding of: 
The high-technology business environment in general and the software industry in particular.
The business concepts and principles behind creating and launching a successful tech venture. 
How to produce, present, and critique business proposals and plans for ventures, and how to develop business simulation and forecasting models in support of these plans. 
How to converse with and present to investors, executives, judging panels, incubators and accelerators. 
Upon successful completion of the course, you will have first-hand experience of the stages, processes, and challenges involved in transforming an idea into an investable and scalable business venture, and will be ideally positioned to begin launching your own tech venture. 
In this course, you will learn techniques and methodologies that will give you a distinct career advantage after graduation, whether or not you intend to work in a tech field. It is designed to give you a true-to-life experience of the thought processes behind successful tech business ventures, which apply whether you are planning on creating your own startup or working for an established employer. You and your team will devise a cool, innovative solution to a significant market problem. This will involve researching your customer base, forming and testing hypotheses, and producing a value proposition that will form the basis for your business model. You will investigate your customer base and market by identifying the key activities, resources and partners needed for fulfillment. This process culminates in a business model that both makes sense in a financial context and resonates with a venture capital (VC) or funding audience—the kind of audience who will eventually be visiting the class to critique your final product and business model.
This course sets very high standards for you because the business world demands nothing less. We have an obligation to ensure that your business education is thorough and demanding, and only students who are exceptionally dedicated and committed to developing mastery over the techniques and methodologies in this course will excel. To apply to take the course please follow this link www.dcsil.ca/student-courses.

CSC454H1 - Business of Software
This course introduces you to the nature, structure, and dynamics of the contemporary software industry. It focuses on the key factors involved in ideating, hypothesizing, validating, and executing a viable and investable/return driven business model to launch a sustainable, scalable and profitable tech-based (software and/or hardware) business venture as a company founder or as an employee of an established company. The course will be a team effort of four students per team. The scope of the course does not include not-for-profit or charity business models.
Course objectives include a meaningful understanding of: 
The high-technology business environment in general and the software industry in particular.
The business concepts and principles behind creating and launching a successful tech venture. 
How to produce, present, and critique business proposals and plans for ventures, and how to develop business simulation and forecasting models in support of these plans. 
How to converse with and present to investors, executives, judging panels, incubators and accelerators. 
Upon successful completion of the course, you will have first-hand experience of the stages, processes, and challenges involved in transforming an idea into an investable and scalable business venture, and will be ideally positioned to begin launching your own tech venture. 
In this course, you will learn techniques and methodologies that will give you a distinct career advantage after graduation, whether or not you intend to work in a tech field. It is designed to give you a true-to-life experience of the thought processes behind successful tech business ventures, which apply whether you are planning on creating your own startup or working for an established employer. You and your team will devise a cool, innovative solution to a significant market problem. This will involve researching your customer base, forming and testing hypotheses, and producing a value proposition that will form the basis for your business model. You will investigate your customer base and market by identifying the key activities, resources and partners needed for fulfillment. This process culminates in a business model that both makes sense in a financial context and resonates with a venture capital (VC) or funding audience—the kind of audience who will eventually be visiting the class to critique your final product and business model.
This course sets very high standards for you because the business world demands nothing less. We have an obligation to ensure that your business education is thorough and demanding, and only students who are exceptionally dedicated and committed to developing mastery over the techniques and methodologies in this course will excel. To apply to take the course please follow this link www.dcsil.ca/student-courses.

CSC2529HF - Computational Imaging
Computational imaging systems have a wide range of applications in consumer electronics, scientific imaging, HCI, medical imaging, microscopy, and remote sensing. We discuss digital photography and basic image processing, convolutional neural networks for image processing, denoising, deconvolution, single pixel imaging, inverse problems in imaging, proximal gradient methods, wave optics, time-of-flight imaging, and end-to-end optimization of optics. Emphasis is on applied image processing and solving inverse problems using formal optimization and modern machine learning techniques. Students apply material by implementing and investigating image processing algorithms in Python. Term project. Experience in linear algebra and signal processing will be helpful.

CSC2530HS - Computational Imaging and 3D Sensing
From the advanced depth cameras in today's smartphones to the 3D sensors of next-gen autonomous vehicles, 3D sensing has already began to revolutionize the way we sense the world. This, however, is just the beginning: cameras that can see in pitch-black darkness and around corners, depth sensors with sub-micron accuracy or a range of several kilometers, and cameras that can see under the skin are already becoming a reality. Key to these developments is the rapid convergence of optics, photonics, sensing and computation.
This seminar course will provide an in-depth look at 3D sensing and related technologies, and the computational techniques used to model and exploit them. Specific topics will include "extreme imaging" with single-photon detectors; principles of time-of-flight imaging and LiDAR; structured-light imaging; 3D imaging through scattering media; and imaging around corners. Class format will be discussed based, with approximately one paper covered per week and a term project. 
Recommended preparation: Graduate-level exposure to one or more computer vision, computer graphics, sensing or numerical optimization is desirable but not required. Prior enrollment in CSC2529 (Computational Imaging) is not necessary.

CSC2532HS - Statistical Learning Theory
This course covers several topics in classical learning theory. Required background for this course includes probability, linear algebra, and multivariate calculus. Minor coding will be required, i.e., the course will provide guidance for verifying the mathematical concepts using numerical experiments/simulations.
Topics include: 
1. Asymptotic statistics
2. Uniform Convergence
3. Generalization and complexity measures
4. Kernel Methods
5. Online Learning
6. Sampling and optimization

CSC2537H - Information Visualization
This course will study techniques and algorithms for creating effective visualizations based on principles from graphic design, visual art, perceptual psychology, and cognitive science. The course is targeted both towards students interested in using visualization in their own work, as well as students interested in learning about cutting edge research in the field. Students will conduct reading and critical analysis of scientific research papers, that will be discussed in class. A final project will make‐up most of the grade, while student presentation and critical analysis skills will also be emphasized.

STA2555H - Information Visualization
This course will study techniques and algorithms for creating effective visualizations based on principles from graphic design, visual art, perceptual psychology, and cognitive science. The course is targeted both towards students interested in using visualization in their own work, as well as students interested in learning about cutting edge research in the field. Students will conduct reading and critical analysis of scientific research papers, that will be discussed in class. A final project will make‐up most of the grade, while student presentation and critical analysis skills will also be emphasized.

CSC2541HF - Topics in Machine Learning: Machine Learning for Healthcare
This course will give a broad overview of machine learning for health. We begin with an overview of what makes healthcare unique, and then explore machine learning methods for clinical and healthcare applications through recent papers. We discuss the recent successes of graphical models, deep learning, time series analysis, and transfer learning in the context of health. We also broadly cover concepts of learning, algorithmic fairness, interpretability, and causality. We emphasize the importance of collaboration between technical and non-technical researchers, and consider the implications of machine learning in healthcare governance and policy. Students will choose and complete a course project, and make project presentations at the end of the course. This course requires a background in linear algebra and probability theory, as well as exposure and ideally completion of a machine learning course. 

CSC2542HF - Topics in Knowledge Representation and Reasoning: KR and Modern AI
Knowledge representation (KR) is a long-standing subfield of AI which studies symbolic representations of knowledge and associated mechanisms for automated reasoning. In this advanced course, we will overview topics in KR and consider the role they may play in modern AI research and systems, such as large language models and reinforcement learning systems. The course will comprise a mix of lectures and student presentations. Students will read research papers, participate in seminar-style presentations, and complete assignment(s) and a course project. Topics include: commonsense reasoning, logics for KR, probabilistic programming, representing goals and preferences, and the relationship between large language models and knowledge bases.
Prerequisites: an introductory course in formal logic or an introductory course in symbolic AI comparable to CSC384, an introductory course in machine learning, and basic familiarity with reinforcement learning.

CSC2547HF - Topics in Machine Learning: Reinforcement Learning
This is an introductory course on reinforcement learning (RL) and sequential decision-making under uncertainty with an emphasis on understanding the theoretical foundation. We study how dynamic programming methods such as value and policy iteration can be used to solve sequential decision-making problems with known models, and how those approaches can be extended in order to solve reinforcement learning problems, where the model is unknown. Other topics include, but not limited to, function approximation in RL, policy gradient methods, model-based RL, and balancing the exploration-exploitation trade-off.
The course is introductory in the sense that it does not assume prior exposure to RL. It is not, however, focused on describing a collection of algorithms or only providing high-level intuition. Instead, it tries to build the mathematical intuition behind many important ideas and concepts often encountered in RL. We prove many basic, or sometimes not so basic, results in RL.
As the emphasis is on understanding the foundation, you should expect to go through mathematical detail and proofs. You need to have some level of mathematical maturity. Required background for this course includes being comfortable with probability theory and statistics, calculus, linear algebra, optimization, and (supervised) machine learning.
The course will be delivered as a mix of lectures and reading of classical and recent papers assigned to students. The deliverables include homework assignments, quizzes, project, reading assignments, exam, etc. 

CSC2547HS - Topics in Machine Learning:  Automated Reasoning with Machine Learning
This course introduces the cutting-edge research on combining reasoning with machine learning. We will first study the logical foundations and algorithms behind many reasoning engines, and then learn how machine learning can be used to improve complicated reasoning systems. This course will cover the following topics: Boolean Satisfiability (SAT), Satisfiability modulo Theories (SMT), program synthesis, statistical approaches for software debugging, inductive logic programming, and neuro-symbolic systems. Extensive paper readings, in-class discussions, and project presentations are expected.

CSC2547HSS1 - Topics in Machine Learning:  AI Alignment
As AI systems become more capable, it becomes important to ensure that they behave in socially beneficial ways. This course examines techniques for aligning AI systems with human values. We first study alignment in the context of several idealized models of AI agents. We then address current-day issues in large language models, including truthfulness and misuse prevention.

CSC2552HF - Topics in Computational Social Science: AI, Data, and Society
Computational and algorithmic systems are now embedded in all parts of society, which introduces both great opportunities and challenges. This course presents an introduction to computational social science, a rapidly growing interdisciplinary field that studies questions at the intersection of AI, data, and society. We focus on the spectrum of methodologies now available for conducting social research in the digital age, from large-scale observational studies to online experimentation, as well as research skills including reading state-of-the-art papers, writing reviews, and doing a research project. Topics covered will include online misinformation, algorithmic bias, and social media platforms.

CSC2558HS - Topics in Multidisciplinary HCI
This course covers topics in HCI that draw on methods and theories from other subfields of computer science and other scientific disciplines, in developing computational principles for designing user-facing systems. Students will learn how to design experiments to investigate the design of technology by drawing on methodology and theories from social and behavioral sciences, as well as to adapt user technologies using models and algorithms from fields such as statistics, machine learning, and artificial intelligence.

CSC2600HS - Topics in Computer Science: Capstone Design
This course is designed and delivered by industry experts form the Software/tech fields. Students will work with teammates from CSC2527H1 to develop a marketable startup on a selected theme. The class will be small and highly interactive. You will work to develop working software industry best practices. You are expected to have experience writing software and be able to learn on the go. For more details, visit our website at https://www.dcsil.ca/student-courses. Not eligible for CR/NCR option.
Students submit a single application for CSC2600H1 and CSC2527H1, describing relevant interests, experience, and skills and general academic history. Application questions are set and assessed by the instructor. Applications are due in summer for the Fall term, and late fall for the Winter term.
Please visit https://q.utoronto.ca/courses/221753/pages/400-level-course-balloting-and-applications for application deadlines and details. A decision on your application will be confirmed approximately 2-3 weeks after the application deadline, so students should enroll in an alternate course until the results of their application are confirmed.
Prerequisite: This course requires permission from the instructor.

CSC491H1 - Topics in Computer Science: Capstone Design
This course is designed and delivered by industry experts form the Software/tech fields. Students will work with teammates from CSC2527H1 to develop a marketable startup on a selected theme. The class will be small and highly interactive. You will work to develop working software industry best practices. You are expected to have experience writing software and be able to learn on the go. For more details, visit our website at https://www.dcsil.ca/student-courses. Not eligible for CR/NCR option.
Students submit a single application for CSC2600H1 and CSC2527H1, describing relevant interests, experience, and skills and general academic history. Application questions are set and assessed by the instructor. Applications are due in summer for the Fall term, and late fall for the Winter term.
Please visit https://q.utoronto.ca/courses/221753/pages/400-level-course-balloting-and-applications for application deadlines and details. A decision on your application will be confirmed approximately 2-3 weeks after the application deadline, so students should enroll in an alternate course until the results of their application are confirmed.
Prerequisite: This course requires permission from the instructor.

CSC2604HF - Topics in Human-Centred and Interdisciplinary Computing: HCI & Intellectual Property
Research seminar on intellectual property issues that arise in protecting and leveraging contemporary human-machine interface innovations both in the academic and commercial arenas.

CSC2611HF - Computational Models of Semantic Change
Words are fundamental components of human language, but their meanings tend to change over time, e.g., face (‘body part’ -> ‘facial expression’), gay (‘happy’-> ‘homosexual’), mouse (‘rodent’ -> ‘device’). Changes like these present challenges for computers to learn accurate representations of word meanings—a task that is crucial to natural language systems. This course explores data-driven computational approaches to word meaning representation and semantic change. Topics include latent models of word meaning (e.g., LSA, word2vec), corpus-based detection of semantic change, probabilistic diachronic models of word meaning, and cognitive mechanisms of word sense extension (e.g., chaining, metaphor). The course involves a strong hands-on component that focuses on large-scale text analyses and seminar-style presentations.

CSC2702HF - Technical Entrepreneurship - MScAC only
The MScAC degree is intended to create technical leaders capable of transferring new technologies from academia to industry. This course introduces fundamental concepts from business and management that are relevant to students thinking about starting their own business or bringing new ideas to fruition within existing ones. This course will also equip students with the experience of presenting and defending their scientific research through various research activities and communications.
Note: This is a mandatory course for students enrolled in the MSc in Applied Computing. At this time non-MScAC students are not eligible to enrol in this course.

CHE1053H - Electrochemistry
This course provides a working knowledge of modern electrochemistry. The topics dealt with include, the physical chemistry of electrolyte solutions, ion transport in solution, ionic conductivity,
electrode equilibrium, reference electrodes, electrode kinetics, heat effects in electrochemical cells, electrochemical energy conversion (fuel cells and batteries), and industrial electrochemical processes. Numerous problems are provided to clarify the concepts.

CHE1100H - Fundamentals of Chemical Engineering
This course is intended for graduate students who don’t have an undergraduate degree in chemical engineering. A high level introduction to the underlying principles of chemical engineering for students who do not have a chemical engineering undergraduate education. Principles will be illustrated through both research examples and classical chemical engineering situations.
Students with an undergraduate degree in Mechanical Engineering or Chemical Engineering are excluded from this course

CHE1102H - Research Methods and Project Execution
This course provides core graduate training in critical research, argumentation, implementation, and communication skills. Through facilitated activity-based tutorials students will develop their research and project management skills, acquiring strategies to identify and articulate a research hypothesis, set research goals and plan their approach (including quantification of results and validation of quantitative metrics), and share research findings effectively via oral, written and graphical communication. Students will develop these skills while learning how to position themselves and their research for employment purposes.

CHE1107H - Applied Mathematics
Review of basic modelling leading to algebraic and ordinary differential equations. Models leading to partial differential equations. Vector analysis. Transport equations. Solution of equations by: Separation of variables, Laplace Transformation, Green’s Functions, Method of Characteristics, Similarity Trans­formation, others time permitting. Practical illustrations and exercises applied to fluid mechanics, heat and mass transfer, reactor engineering, environmental problems and biomedical systems. Lecture notes provided.

CHE1108H - Numerical Methods in Chemical Engineering
The purpose of this course is to introduce a first year graduate level numerical methods course with an emphasis on applications in chemical engineering. The course will consist of three main topic areas relevant to chemical engineering, namely: 1) numerical integration, 2) optimization and 3) solution of partial differential equations. The skills developed for numerical integration are fundamental to many more complex problems in numerical methods relevant to chemical engineering. In this course, we will first focus on the solution of initial value problems (IVP) of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) as this is a building block for advanced numerical integration. Many chemical engineering problems require the solution of ODE-IVPs, most prominently, chemical reaction kinetics and simple fluid flow problems. Next, we will introduce basic concepts in numerical optimization. Numerical optimization is another fundamental tool utilized by numerical methods analysts and there are many chemical engineering problems that require the use of numerical optimization. Some examples include the prediction of the geometry of a molecule, optimization of plant processes and optimal control. Finally, we will explore numerical methods for solving PDEs. PDEs are fundamental to chemical engineering processes and in all but some very simple cases, numerical methods are required to arrive at approximate solutions. Classical examples in chemical engineering include fluid mechanics and heat and mass transfer.

CHE1118H - Industrial Catalysis
The course covers adsorption, the nature of the catalyst surface, kinetics of catalytic reactions, catalyst selection and preparation, deactivation and poisoning, and specific catalytic reactions. The types of reactions and the examples considered will depend to some extent on the particular interests of those selecting the course but will include, in any case, nitrogen fixation, Cl chemistry, catalysis in petroleum refining (cracking, reforming, alkylation, hydrorefining, etc.), and catalysis by transition metal complexes.

CHE1123H - Liquid Biofuels
An introduction and overview of bioenergy production technologies, including: first generation biochemical technologies to produce biofuels (e.g, from sugarcane, starch, and oilseeds). The course will then describe second generation technologies to produce biofuels (e.g., from lignocellulosics) followed by advanced technologies as well as the so-called “drop-in fuels.” It will include the theory and process aspects of hydrogenation-derived renewable diesel. An overview of fuel properties will also be given. Finally the course will conclude with environmental impacts - benefits and issues, economic aspects as well as infrastructure requirements and trade-offs.

CHE1125H - Modelling and Optimization of Chemical/Biomedical Networks
Components of biological networks, their biochemical properties and function along with the technology used for obtaining component lists will be emphasized. Top-down and bottom-up approach to modeling and reconstruction of chemical reaction networks along with biochemical networks, such as metabolic networks, regulatory networks and signaling networks from data will be presented. Mathematical models of reconstructed reaction networks, and simulation of their emergent properties will be studied. The course will also cover classical kinetic theory, network simulation methods and constraints-based models of biochemical networks. Multi-scale modeling methods that integrate multiple cellular processes at different time and length scales will be emphasized. Existing biological models will be described and computations performed. Iterative methods for discovering novel biological function through comparison of model predictions and experimental data will be discussed in the context of Systems Biology and Bioengineering. PREREQ: Engineering Biology, Calculus, Differential Equations

CHE1126H - Radiation Chemistry and Radiochemistry
Radiation chemistry is the study of the chemical effects of electromagnetic radiation, radioactive particles, and fission fragments. Radiochemistry is concerned with the chemistry of molecules that incorporate  radioactive  atoms.  This  introductory  course  aims  at  explaining  the  physical  and chemical  mechanisms  of  radiation-related  phenomena encountered  in  science  and  engineering. The  following  topics  are  covered:  radiation  physics;  chemical  effects  of  ionizing  radiation  on matter  including  radiolytic  processes  in  gases  and aqueous  solutions;  radioactivity;  elements  of radiochemistry including the synthesis of radioisotopically labeled compounds, isotopic exchange reactions, applications; hot-atom chemistry, and the chemical effects of nuclear transformations.

CHE1450H - Bioprocess Engineering
In this course, students will learn theoretical and practical aspects of Bioprocess Engineering which uses biological, biochemical, and chemical engineering principles for the conversion of raw materials to bioproducts in the food, pharmaceutical, fuel, and chemical industries, among others. Emphasis will be placed on the understanding of biomanufacturing principles and processes during the upstream production and downstream purification of bioproducts. Microbial and mammalian cell processes will be discussed. Basic concepts of scale up and the types of bioreactors used in industry will be introduced. Challenges in biomanufacturing and process validation will be discussed as well. The course includes (5) labs in which students will apply some of the concepts learned in class.

CHE1134H - Advances in Bioengineering
This course, designed for graduate students whose research is at the interface of Engineering and Biology, will review recent advances in molecular and analytical methods relevant to bioprocess engineering, environmental microbiology and biotechnology, biomedical engineering, and other related topics. Following fundamental instruction on specific molecular and analytical methods, students will be required to prepare a critical review of chosen, peer reviewed articles that demonstrate the utility of discussed methods for the advancement of bioengineering concepts and applications. Discussion of the scientific, technological, environmental, economic, legal, and ethical impacts of the research will follow.

CHE1141H - Advanced Chemical Reaction Engineering (co-taught with CHE412)
This second-level course in reactor design and analysis focuses upon the following topics: multiphase kinetics and catalysis; simultaneous diffusion and reaction, including an analysis using effectiveness factors and Thiele modulus; analysis of models of complex flow and mixing in reactors; reactor modelling; reactor performance and stability of operation for simple and complex kinetic schemes; design considerations for heterogeneous reactors; industrial and research applications of chemical reactors.

CHE1142H - Applied Chemical Thermodynamics
This course has the objective of reviewing the basic concepts of thermodynamics with specific applications to processes involving phase equilibrium or equilibrium in chemical reactions. The course is divided in three parts. In the first part we will review the laws of thermodynamics, and the thermodynamic properties and phase behavior of pure substances. In the second part we will review the thermodynamic properties in mixtures and multiphase equilibria in non-reactive systems. In the last part of the course we will review the energy balance and equilibrium in chemical reactions. The evaluation will consist of a midterm at the end of the review section, and a final exam that will evaluate the last two parts of the course. This course also involves a term project where the student uses some of these concepts in a specific example related to his/her thesis project.

CHE1143H - Transport Phenomena
Momentum, heat and mass transfer. General balances: continuity, species continuity, energy, and linear momentum equations. Rate expressions: Newton’s law of viscosity, Fourier’s law of conduction, and Fick’s law of diffusion. Applications to multi-dimensional problems, convective transport, transport in turbulent flow, interphase transport, boundary layer theory. Discussion of transport analogies.

CHE1147H - Data Mining in Engineering
Extracting useful knowledge from data requires interdisciplinary skills in scientific computing methods and algorithms. The broader term that captures all the skills is called data science or data mining. Data-driven organizations leverage their data effectively and generate business insights that enable better decision-making and problem solving. In this course, we will present both the theoretical background and practical application of data science including programming, machine learning algorithms and data engineering. Students will gain hands-on experience on major data science techniques and tools and how they are applied to real-world data sets. Some basic knowledge of programming and statistics is expected. Python is the programming language that will be used in class.

CHE1148H - Process Data Analytics
The driving force of the fourth industrial revolution is the processing and analysis of big data to extract knowledge, patterns and information. Chemical, biologics/pharma, oil/gas, financial and manufacturing organizations are in a unique position to benefit from this data revolution, as they collect and store massive amounts of heterogeneous data. Big data is characterized by the 5 V’s: volume, velocity, variety, veracity and value and distributed computing architectures are used to process the data. The first part of this course will be on Apache Spark, a big data processing and computing engine. In the second part, special topics in analytics such as visualization, data quality, interpretable/fair ML and MLOps will be discussed. Prerequisites: An introductory course in data science or machine learning (e.g. CHE1147 or other similar courses). Familiarity with Python.

CHE1150H - Industrial Water Technology
This is a basic course on technologies used for Produced Water in the resource sector. The course will cover theory and practice of membranes (UF, NF, RO), ion exchange, lime softening, demineralization, and filtration as applied in this sector. The lecture material delivered by professionals in the field will be supplemented by a hands-on project operating a triple membrane water treatment system.

CHE1151H - Engineering Systems Sustainability
This is a multidisciplinary course that provides the necessary components, concepts and frameworks of sustainability and its relation to engineering projects. It introduces the basic ideas of systems thinking that are used to understand and model complex problems, such as input, output, control, feedback, boundary and hierarchy. It then describes sustainability as a complex challenge of interacting technical, social, economic and environmental systems, and introduces systemic sustainability frameworks such as The Natural Step. It then focuses on the sustainability of organizations and the standards (e.g. ISO 26000 and GRI) that can help design effective sustainability improvement initiatives and strategies. A primary focus of the course is on life cycle assessment (LCA) and related standards (ISO14044, ISO14025) as a tool to understand the broad impacts of engineering projects, unit processes, products and services and the inevitable trade-offs in design decisions. Specific process case studies are examined related to chemical engineering and their relation to promoting a circular economy, including recycling of energy and material flows. Finally, the course presents the economic aspect of sustainability and how to create the business case to secure the support of decision makers in the implementation of sustainable processes in organizations.

CHE1213H - Corrosion
The following topics amongst others, are treated: the various types and forms of corrosion, electrochemical theories of corrosion, corrosion testing methods, corrosion behaviour of iron, steel, and other common engineering metals, corrosion of steel and aluminum in reinforced concrete, passivity, atmospheric corrosion, underground corrosion, seawater corrosion, effects of stress, corrosion in the chemical process industries, the use of Pourbaix diagrams and methods of corrosion protection and control (selection of materials, coatings, corrosion inhibitors, cathodic protection, anodic protection). A number of problems (with worked solutions) are provided to clarify the concepts.

CHE1310H - Chemical Properties of Polymers
This graduate course will cover modern methods of polymer synthesis and characterization, structure-property relationships, chemical modification of polymers, thermal behaviour and rheology, self-assembly, hydrogels, and related topics. Emphasis will be given to areas of current academic and industrial interest within polymer science, including analysis of recent scholarly literature and novel polymer-based commercial technologies.
Pre-requisite:  CHE562H1:  Applied Chemistry IV - Applied Polymer Chemistry, Science and Engineering (or equivalent).

CHE1333H - Biomaterials Engineering for Nanomedicine
Overview of principles of nanoengineering for biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries. This course will study the formulation and manufacturing processes for producing nanomaterials for medical applications; pharmacokinetics, biocompatibility, immunogenicity of nanobiomaterials. The course will also introduce basic concepts in entrepreneurship and regulatory affairs associated bringing nano/bio-technologies from a lab environment to commercial products. In addition to course lectures, students will complete two laboratory exercises that will provide hands-on learning in emulsified formulations and characterizations involving nanostructures.

CHE1334H - Organ-on-a-Chip
This graduate course will focus on the latest developments in the field of Organ-on-a-Chip Engineering, with a specific focus on Organ-on-a-Chip Industry. Topics related to on-chip engineering of heart, kidney, cancer, vasculature and liver will be discussed.

CHE1335H - Applied Colloid Science
This course introduces the composition, methods of production and characterization, and uses of colloidal systems, including suspensions, emulsions, foams, aerosols and gels. The thermodynamic-based and kinetic-based theories of colloid formation and stability are introduced. The hydrodynamics of colloids and complex fluids is also discussed along with the connection between colloid composition, its rheological properties, its mass transfer properties and the connection between these properties and the performance of colloid-based products. The course will also introduce fundamental concepts towards characterization emulsion structures using light scattering, microscopy and spectroscopy. Finally, the chemistry and formulation principles of colloid-based products is also revised, in particularly the selection of solvents, surfactants, and polymers required.

CHE1430H - Hydrometallurgy, Theory & Practise
The course focus in on metals recovery from mineral recourses by hydrometallurgical technology. Ore formation, geology and mineralogy is reviewed. Mining techniques are also briefly reviewed and generic hydrometallurgy flowsheets are discussed. Mineral upgrading methods are discussed followed by leaching fundamentals (chemistry-thermodynamics-kinetrics), including bioleaching technology, and equipment. Solid-liquid separation and solution purification techniques such as by chemical precipitation, ion exchange and solvent extraction are also discussed. Examples from pure metal recovery and effluent treatment; residue disposal technologies for environmental compliance are presented. Finally, process development, plant design, plant control strategies, Economic, Social and Environmental Considerations, followed by several industrial examples is offered.

CHE1431H - Environmental Auditing
The goals of the course will be to: (a) understand fundamental concepts and principles of environmental auditing; (b) understand relevant federal and provincial environmental legislation; (c) understand environmental management system and similar standards; (d) improve audit skills and knowledge of principles; (e) understand the Environmental Management System (EMS) auditing and certification/registration process. The course will be structured to provide sufficient background in the concepts of environmental management, due diligence, environmental protection, and the process of auditing these topics for verification purposes. The course material will be presented in a combination of lecture and workshop formats.

CHE1432H - Technical Aspects of Environmental Regulations
Environmental regulations are based on the existence and/or likely occurrence of adverse effects. This course will examine the legal definitions of adverse effects and present possible scientific methods that can be used to establish the presence/absence of adverse effects. The specific regulations for Air, Waste, Contaminated Sites, and Water will then be examined to establish scientific methodologies that can be applied to show compliance with the letter and intent of the regulations. Particular emphases will be placed on the existence of variable scientific interpretations of the key general statements in the respective regulations.

CHE1433H - Air Dispersion Modelling
The goal of the course will be to provide the students with an understanding of the fundamental principles of air quality modelling, the use of screening and advanced air dispersion models, as well as the limitations of these tools in actual practice. The course will also address other relevant air quality related subjects such as ambient monitoring and dispersion model verification. The course will be structured to provide sufficient background in dispersion modelling theory to allow the users to make informed decisions on model inputs, modelling methodologies and approximations. The course will feature both theory sessions as well as hands on training in the use of dispersion models (US EPA SCREEN 3 and AERMOD models) and data processing.

CHE1434H- Six Sigma for Chemical Processes
Six Sigma is a proven process improvement methodology currently being employed across nearly every type of business and industry including numerous Chemical Process Industry companies. Design for Six Sigma (DfSS) has been developed more recently with the goal to apply the Six Sigma principles to the design of new products and processes. This course will also provide a working know-how of the Six Sigma problem solving and process improvement protocol (DMAIC). It is based on the lecturer’s own experience as a double Black Belt in Lean Six Sigma and Design for Lean Six Sigma at Xerox Research Centre of Canada. This course will include examples and case studies in order to show the students the practical value of Six Sigma in the chemical and related industries. The students will use themselves Six Sigma and Design for Six Sigma process and statistical tools to solve problems and explore designing new chemical process in workshops that will be part of each class.

CHE1435H - Aerosol Physics and Chemistry
This course is concerned with physical and chemical properties of aerosols and their impacts on earth’s climate, air quality and human health. This course will cover the fundamentals of aerosol physics and chemistry, and relate these principles to the overall impacts. The first section will cover single particle processes (particle drag, gravitational settling, diffusion) and evolution of an aerosol population (new particle formation, condensation and coagulation, deposition and cloud droplet formation). In the second section, the various components in atmospheric aerosol will be discussed in detail, including kinetics and thermodynamics of organic and inorganic compounds. Applications to industrial processes, such as drug delivery and chemical manufacturing, will also be explored. This course is critical to those students pursuing careers in atmospheric science and air pollution control, who will need to measure, model and control airborne particles.

CHE1436H- Risk Assessment for Chemical Process Safety
The course will address chemical hazards that impact process safety - specifically fires, explosions and toxic effects.  Students will learn how model consequences, model likelihood, analyze risk and evaluate risk.  Students will be exposed to the most popular/widely used methods in industry.   In addition, the course will also cover: Risk management - framework, description of risk concepts, risk reduction, managing residual risk; Process design and facility siting; Prevention and mitigation - safety systems -what they are, their design; A thorough description of risk evaluation - risk tolerance criteria - how they are established and used, risk informed decision-making, benefit cost analysis; Human factors - how human error affects process safety.

CHE1471H - Modelling in Biological and Chemical Systems
To review the methodology for the analytical modeling of physical systems with emphasis on chemical engineering applications. The course will cover the following topics: Analysis and Modelling of Physical Systems Review of ODEs’; Mass Balance and Continuity Equation
Species Balance, Stoichiometry and Reaction Kinetics; Force Balances and Mechanics of Materials; Fluid Mechanics and Navier-Stokes Equations; Flow Through Porous Media; Conservation of Mechanical Energy; First Law of Thermodynamics and Thermal Energy Balance
Heat Transfer, Fourier Law, and Equation of Energy; Mass Transfer, Fick’s Law, and Species Continuity Equation; Probabilistic Modelling.

CHE1475H - Biocomposite Materials
This course will teach students about structure, properties and application of natural and biological materials, biomaterials for biomedical applications, and fibre reinforced composites including composites based on renewable resources. The course has a strong focus in fundamental principles related to polymeric material linear elasticity, linear viscoelasticity, dynamic response, composite reinforcement mechanics, and time-temperature correspondence that are critical to understand the functional performance of these types of materials. Novel concepts about comparative biomechanics, biomimetic and bio-inspired material design, and ecological impact are discussed. Key processing methods and testing and characterization techniques of these materials are also covered.

CHE3001H - Seminars in Chemical Engineering
This course exposes graduate students to the latest developments in a wide range of topics in Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry. Students are provided with a breadth of understanding of the current trends in the many fields which fall under the umbrella of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, through seminars given by internationally renowned experts through the Department’s Lectures at the Leading Edge series. This course is mandatory for all M.A.Sc. and Ph.D. students and is to be taken annually.

JCB1349H - Molecular Assemblies
This course will focus on the mechanisms associated with the assembly of molecular and biomolecular systems, including colloids, small molecule organic crystals, and protein complexes. The goal of the course is to foster an understanding of the subtle interactions that influence the process of assembly, which has wide ranging implications in fields ranging from materials science to structural biology. Examples will be drawn from the current literature encompassing studies of self-assembly in solution, at surfaces, and into the solid state. Supplementary reading and a term project targeting some aspect of molecular assembly will be assigned.

JCC1313H - Environmental Microbiology
The objective of this course is to develop fundamental aspects of microbiology and biochemistry as they relate to energetics and kinetics of microbial growth, environmental pollution and water quality, bioconversions, biogeochemical cycles, bioenergy and other bioproducts.

JNC2503H- Environmental Pathways
The objective of this course is to convey an appreciation of the sources, behaviour, fate and effects of selected toxic compounds which may be present in the environment. Emphasis is on organic compounds, including hydrocarbons, halogenated hydrocarbons and pesticides. The approach will be to examine, for each compound, physical and chemical properties, sources, uses, mechanisms of release into the environment, major environmental pathways and fates (including atmospheric dispersion and deposition), movement in aquatic systems (including volatilization, incorporation into sediments, biodegradation, photolysis, sorption), movement in soils, and bioconcentration. Toxicology and analytical methodology will be described very briefly. Each student will undertake a detailed individual study of a specific toxic compound.

JTC1134H - Applied Surface and Interface Science
This course covers basic surface physical chemistry relevant to applied science and engineering materials. Among the topics covered are: Surface structures of both crystalline and non-crystalline materials - relaxation, surface electronic structure - work function, band structure, interfacial phenomena, surface thermodynamics, the Gibbs construct, double layer theory, micellular structure, surface kinetics, catalysis, adsorption, adhesion and wetting. This is a companion course to JTC1135, APPLIED SURFACE ANALYSIS which covers analytical techniques for the study of surfaces and interfaces.

JTC1135H - Applied Surface and Interface Analysis
There is no single or simple analytical technique for the study of surfaces and interfaces. Multiple techniques are available, each limited in what it can reveal. A knowledge of most current analytical techniques, their strengths and limitations, is the main material delivered in this course. The fundamentals of the techniques will be presented sufficient to understand the techniques; the material will be presented in the context of relevant technological problems, including individual projects. The fundamentals of surface and interface chemistry is covered extensively in a separate companion course (JTC1134 Applied Surface and Interface Science - taught in alternate winter terms). No prerequisite knowledge of surface chemistry fundamentals is assumed.

JTC1331H - Biomaterials
This course presents an introduction to the science of biomaterials, focusing on polymeric biomaterials and biocompatibility. Topics include biomaterial surface analysis, hydrogel rheology and swelling, protein adsorption, cell adhesion and migration and the foreign body response. Primary focus is on implantable biomaterials but some attention will be given to applications of biomaterials in biotechnology and drug delivery. Specific device or other examples as well as the research literature will be used to illustrate the topic at hand.
Required: Students need to have taken at least one Biology undergraduate course and should have taken a Polymers undergraduate course.

CEM1002H - Empirical Study of Cities
This course provides students with an introduction to the topic of cities, how they are measured, and the methods used to measure them. The strengths and limitations of various measures are examined including issues related the cost of collecting data and the challenges in ensuring its integrity. After reviewing the most commonly used statistical analysis methods, student will calculate and use metrics to compare cities in Canada, North America, and around the world. Metrics of interest include, but are not limited to, those related to city services, public health and well-being, environmental sustainability, and economic vitality.
Registration in this course is reserved for MEngCEM students. Other students wishing to register must request permission from the Office of Student Services.

CEM1003H - Infrastructure & Urban Prosperity
The course explores the evolution of great cities over time, looking at form and function to understand urban economic growth and accumulation of wealth. Drawing from various strands of economic thought, topics include: value theory; quantification of urban wealth; microeconomics of real estate markets; infrastructure for competitive financial centres; macroeconomics of urban form; growth theory; and evolutionary economics applied to urban systems. Using current and historical examples of urban development, the implications of infrastructure planning and management on the health/wealth of cities is examined.
Registration in this course is reserved for MEngCEM students. Other students wishing to register must request permission from the Office of Student Services.

CEM1004H - Cities As Complex Systems
Professor Eric Miller
Cities are problems in organized complexity (Jacobs, 1961). This course will explore this theme and its implications for city engineering and management in terms of: introduction to complex systems theory; exploration of cities as systems (physical, economic, social, etc.); holistic and reductionist approaches to 'a science of cities'; approaches to city planning and design in the face of complexity; challenges to sustainable design; and decision-making under uncertainty.
Registration in this course is reserved for MEngCEM students. Other students wishing to register must request permission from the Office of Student Services.

CIV501H - Building Energy Performance Simulation
Prof. Seungjae Lee
Building performance simulation (BPS) is the process of imitating/predicting aspects of building performance with computational building models. The models draw heavily upon the disciplines of heat and mass transfer, thermodynamics, fluid mechanics, light transmission, and occupant behaviour. BPS allows improving the design and operation of buildings through quantitative analyses. This course will provide students with theoretical knowledge and practical skills to effectively apply BPS tools in design and analysis contexts focusing on building heating and cooling loads, building energy systems, and whole-building energy performance

CIV510H - Solid Mechanics II
This course provides a continuing study of the mechanics of deformable solids. Stress and equilibrium conditions, strain and compatibility conditions, stress-strain relations and yield/failure criteria are considered in the context of civil engineering materials. Two-and three-dimensional elasticity theory is developed, with an introduction to the use of tensor notation. Advanced topics in bending, shear and torsion of beams are also covered, as is elementary plate bending theory. The course concludes with a further development and application of energy methods including virtual work, potential energy, strain energy, and related approaches.

CIV514H - Concrete Technology
Prof. Karl Peterson
Material aspects of concrete production will be dealt with in the context of various performance criteria with emphasis on durability. The process of material selection, proportioning, mixing, transporting, placing and curing concrete will be the framework within which topics such as: the use of admixtures, choice of cements, environmental influences, methods of consolidation and testing techniques will be studied.

CIV515H - Introduction To Structural Dynamics
The concept of dynamic equilibrium and corresponding equation of motion will be introduced. The theoretical solution of a single degree of freedom system will be derived and the effects of various types of loads, such as impulse load, sinusoidal load, or random vibration on the structural response will be discussed. To solve dynamic problems of multi-degree of freedom (MDOF) systems, concepts of mass, stiffness, and damping matrix will be introduced, which will be followed by eigen value analysis and modal analysis. The concepts of Fourier Transformation will be introduced, which will be used to interpret dynamic responses of structures or dynamic nature of applied loads. Dynamic experiments of elastic systems will be demonstrated using an educational shaking table.

CIV516H - Public Transit Operations and Planning
This course covers a broad range of topics in urban transit operations and planning, with special emphasis on best-practice strategies of modern transit systems. The course will help students: Learn the history of transit and its relationship to urban development, emerging challenges, transit role in society, and new trends and issues; Understand and analyze the factors that affect transit performance and demand; Identify and analyze transit operational and planning problems; Identify possible solutions at the operational level (mostly short-term and line-based) and the strategic level (mostly long-term and network-based), and assess alternative solutions; Understand the relative performance of various transit modes (both conventional and new modes) and their domains of application; and gain knowledge of best-practice transit systems planning and emerging innovations.

CIV517H - Prestressed Concrete
An introduction to procedures for predicting the load-deformation response of prestressed concrete elements and structures with emphasis on how these procedures can be used in the design of new structures and in the evaluation of existing structures. Topics include: prestressing technology; control of cracking; response to axial load and flexure; response to shear and torsion; disturbed regions; restraint of deformations; design codes.
Prerequisite: CIV313H1 or CIV357H1 or equivalent.

CIV518H - Behaviour and Design of Steel Structures
The behaviour and design of trusses, frames, members and connections in steel building and bridge structures is presented and design methods are developed. Ultimate strength, stability, and postbuckling are emphasized in topical examples including: plate girders, composite steel/concrete girders, second-order frame behaviour, high-strength bolted and welded framing connections. Design applications considering metal fatigue and brittle fracture, and methods of plastic analysis are also introduced. Canadian design standards and the Limit States Design concepts are used.

CIV519H - Structural Analysis II
The general flexibility and stiffness methods of analysis; multispan beams, trusses, frames and grids; loadings due to force, support displacement, temperature change and member prestrain; axial and flexural stability; basic plasticity. Topics in this course represent the basis for the finite element method of analysis.
Prerequisite: CIV214H1.

CIV521H - Rock Mechanics
This course provides general analytical tools and experimental methods that are used in rock mechanics. The lectures are complemented with laboratory experiments. Theoretical topics include: stress and strain, linear elasticity, failure modes and models of rocks, fracture of rocks, inelastic behavior of rock, seismic waves in rocks. Experiments include: preparation of rock samples, uniaxial compressive strength measurements, Brazilian disc tests for rock tensile strength, fracture toughness measurements with core-based rock samples.
Prerequisite: CIV210H1/CME210H1

CIV523H - Geotechnical Design
This course is built around a transportation project that contains all the essential geotechnical investigation and design elements and illustrates how they all come together on a project. The students will be taken through the entire design process from project initiation to construction. In essence, the project will include a bridge over a river with some property constraints requiring the use of a retaining wall as well as deep and shallow foundations and some groundwater control. The highway will require a soil cut. One section crosses a low-lying swampy area that will require embankment construction over deep soft soils. A short tunnel section is planned beneath a railway that cannot be taken out of service. A pavement design will be required along the entire route as well as materials testing and construction monitoring.
Prerequisite: CIV321H1/CME321H1; equivalent or permission of instructor.

CIV531H - Transport Planning
This course is intended to provide the student with the following: the ability to design and execute an urban transportation planning study; a working knowledge of transportation planning analysis skills including introductions to travel demand modelling, analysis of environmental impacts, modelling transportation - land use interactions and transportation project evaluation; an understanding of current transportation planning issues and policies; and an understanding of the overall process of transportation planning and its role within the wider context of transportation decision-making and the planning and design of urban areas. Person-based travel in urban regions is the focus of this course, but a brief introduction to freight and intercity passenger transportation is also provided. A â€œsystemsâ€ approach to transportation planning and analysis is introduced and maintained throughout the course. Emphasis is placed throughout on designing transportation systems for long-run environmental, social, and economic sustainability.
Prerequisite: CIV368H1 / CME368H1.

CIV536H - Urban Activity, Air Pollution and Health
This is an interdisciplinary course where the challenge of air pollution is introduced with a focus on urban areas. The interdependencies between transportation, air quality, and health are demonstrated. The city and the behaviour of its inhabitants constitute the context for the following course topics: overview of air pollutants in urban areas, urban air quality monitoring networks, mobile source emissions, air pollution and meteorology, atmospheric dispersion, chemical processes specific to cities, personal mobility and exposure to traffic-related air pollution, epidemiology of air pollution.

CIV541H - Environmental Biotechnology
Principles involved in the design and operation of biologically-based treatment facilities are covered with considerations for energy efficiency and sustainability. The course includes water / wastewater biological unit operations, advanced treatment, sludge processing and composting, natural treatment systems and specialized bioengineered systems such as groundwater remediation and biological air treatment.
Prerequisite: CIV342H1 or equivalent.

CIV549H - Groundwater Flow and Contamination
Mechanics of saturated and unsaturated fluid flow in porous media. Confined and unconfined flow. Flow to wells. Analytical and numerical solutions of groundwater flow equations. Non-reactive and reactive contaminant transport on groundwater systems. Analytical and numerical solutions of contaminant transport equations. Flow and solute transport in fractured porous media. Assessment of environmental impacts of waste disposal operations. Remediation of contaminated groundwater.
Prerequisite: JVM270H1/CIV270H1/CME270H1, CIV250H1/EDV250H1 or equivalent.

CIV550H - Water Resources Engineering
Global and national water problems, law and legislation. Hydraulic structures. Reservoir analysis. Urban drainage and runoff control: meteorologic data analysis, deterministic and stochastic modelling techniques. Flood control: structural and nonstructural alternatives. Power generation: hydro and thermal power generation. Low flow augmentation. Economics and decision making.
Prerequisite: CIV250H1/EDV250H1, CIV340H1 S or equivalent.

CIV575H - Studies in Building Science
This course examines the basic principles governing the control of heat, moisture and air movement in buildings and presents the fundamentals of building enclosure design. With this background, students are required to research advanced topics related to emerging areas of Building Science, and to write and present to the class an individual comprehensive paper related to their research. Lectures for this course will be jointly offered with those of CIV375H1.
Exclusion: CIV375H1.

CIV576H - Sustainable Buildings
Building systems including the thermal envelope, heating and cooling systems, as well as water and lighting systems are examined with a view to reducing the net energy consumed within the building. Life-cycle economic and assessment methods are applied to the evaluation of various design options including considerations of embodied energy and carbon sequestration. Green building strategies including natural ventilation, passive solar, photovoltaics, solar water heaters, green roofs and geothermal energy piles are introduced. Following the application of these methods, students are introduced to efficient designs including LEED designs that lessen the impact of buildings on the environment. Exemplary building designs will be presented and analyzed.
Prerequisite: CIV375H1/CIV575H1 or equivalent.

CIV577H - Infrastructure for Sustainable Cities
Developing infrastructure for sustainable cities entails understanding the connection between urban morphology and physiology. This course uses a systems approach to analyzing anthropogenic material flow and other components of urban metabolism, linking them to the design of urban infrastructure. Elements of sustainable transportation, green buildings, urban climatology, urban vegetation, water systems and local energy supply are integrated in the design of sustainable urban neighbourhoods.
Prerequisite: CIV340H1, [CIV375H1/CIV575H1], CIV531H1.

CIV578H - Design of Building Enclosures
A brief summary of the science involved in controlling heat, moisture and air movement in buildings is presented at the outset of the course. With this background, methods of designing enclosures for cold, mixed, and hot climates are examined. Design principles related to the design of walls, windows and roofs are presented and applied. In particular, topics related to the control of rain penetration, air movement, and interstitial condensation are studied in detail. Emphasis is placed on developing designs based on fundamentals which can be verified with computer modelling solutions.
Prerequisite: CIV375/CIV575 or equivalent.

CIV580H - Engineering and Management of Large Projects
This technical elective course will investigate the role of stakeholders in major civil engineering projects; the complexities of managing project stages, multiple stakeholders, and technical challenges, and, social and environmental factors.
Each week includes a different speaker who can address issues related to technical, social, and environmental challenges in the project and how they were overcome.

CIV1520 - Travel Survey Methods
Prof. Khandker Nural Habib
The field of travel survey methods draws on theories and practices developed in several academic disciplines - mathematics, statistics, psychology, sociology, computer science, and economics. The course will focus on the types and quality of travel surveys necessary for planning and managing transportation systems; theories and techniques of sampling for travel surveys; methods and modes of survey implementation; designing stated preference experiments; data imputation, and data fusion techniques. Knowledge gained from this course will be valuable for professional practice in transportation planning, operation, and management. It will also provide a solid foundation for advanced transportation research. This course provides the students with an understanding and knowledge of designing and implementing travel data collection studies. This course aims to provide comprehensive knowledge on all aspects of travel data collection necessary for the future professionals involved in planning, developing, operating, managing, and monitoring transportation systems. The course will equip the students with knowledge of basic concepts relevant to travel data collection and analysis; current practices in data collection; major steps involved in travel data collection for planning and management of transportation systems; and practical issues in travel data collection.

CIV1599 - New Topics in Civil & Mineral Engineering: Analytics for Transit and Mobility Networks
Prof. Amer Shalaby
Transit agencies around the world witness a growing trend of data abundance and diversity, presenting opportunities to enhance transit system effectiveness but requiring specialized knowledge and experience with analytics for harnessing such data. Transportation agencies and companies overseeing other modes and emerging mobility services are faced with the same challenges. This course provides students with in-depth exposure to emerging data types, sources and standards for transit and other mobility systems . The course will cover a range of analytics for harnessing diverse data in a variety of  planning and management applications. While special focus will be given to transit applications, other mobility modes and services will be considered as appropriate.

CIV1163H - Mechanics of Reinforced Concrete
Theories of elasticity and plasticity, as applied to reinforced concrete, are examined. Topics include: mechanical properties of concrete and reinforcement; constitutive relations; failure criteria; linear-elastic models; nonlinear-elastic models; elastic-plastic models; limit analysis theorems; and an introduction to fracture mechanics of concrete. Compression field and smeared crack models are discussed, as are methods of their implementation and application in nonlinear finite element analyses.
Prerequisites: CIV313H1, CIV510H1.

CIV1164H - Bridge Engineering
Prof. Paul Gauvreau
This course deals with advanced topics in modern bridge design. Actual course content will vary from year to year, and will include topics selected from the following list: concrete segmental bridges, cable-supported bridges, arches, precast concrete systems for rehabilitation of existing bridges, and innovative composite systems. For a given topic, the approach taken will be to define performance requirements; describe structural systems, components, and critical details; and develop analytical methods for dimensioning and validation, giving special consideration to the interaction between design and construction. There will be a strong emphasis throughout the course on the application of leading-edge and emerging technologies, including high-performance materials.
Prerequisite: CIV517

CIV1167H - Advanced Structural Dynamics
Prof. Oya Mercan
This course provides the basic principles of system identification and structural control. In order to bridge the gap that the civil engineering students have with regards to the interdisciplinary aspects of CIV1167H, principles of signals, sensors, data acquisition and filtering, complex plane representation of system dynamics, and relationship between different transformation for information mapping between time and frequency domains, and processing of random signals are covered in detail. Analytical and experimental modal analysis topics are included, which not only provide the students with a system identification tool but also enable them to handle the dynamics of complex structures with non-proportional damping.

CIV1169H - Advanced Topics in Building Design
Prof. Shamim Sheikh
Introduction to various structural systems; analysis of coupled shear walls using various techniques such as Laminar method, Finite difference formulation, Equivalent Frame method; stagewise incremental analysis of walls including plastification of laminae; design of walls and coupling beams; shear wall-frame interaction; behaviour of framed tubes; shear lag in tubes; approximate methods of analysis for frame tubes and multi-storey frames. Individual projects involving specialized topics will form an integral part of the course.
Prerequisite: CIV313H1 or equivalent

CIV1171H - Principles of Earthquake Engineering and Seismic Design
Prof. Constantin Christopoulos
The objectives of the course are to acquaint graduate students and practicing engineers with the basics of earthquake engineering and seismic resistant design of structures. Upon successful completion of this course, participants will be able to interact with seismologists and understand the fundamentals behind seismic hazard maps contained in our codes, apply basic dynamics principles to seismic design, understand the seismic design philosophy that is implemented in all codes and apply the main steps that are involved in the seismic design of buildings made of steel or reinforced concrete. Special emphasis will be given to the real behaviour of structures under seismic loading, more specifically the formation of ductile mechanisms, and the assessment of performance under different intensities of seismic input. Common pitfalls in seismic design will be extensively discussed, and the underlying assumptions and code requirements related to the detailing of a number of RC and steel lateral load resisting systems will be presented. Pre-requisite: CIV515 or an equivalent course.

CIV1174 - Finite Element Methods in Structural Mechanics
Review of required mathematical concepts. Thorough development of the displacement method of finite element analysis; Derivation of the element matrices for planes stress and strain, three dimensional, axisymmetric and plate bending elements; Introduction to nonlinear analysis; Application to structures using existing computer capabilities.

CIV1175 - Design of Tubular Steel Structures
Prof. Jeffrey Packer
This course covers contemporary structural design with an extremely popular material—­tubular steel. An overview of international specifications and design guides is given and "state-of-the-art" limit states design procedures are presented, discussed and illustrated with worked examples. Offshore structures are given some treatment but the course concentrates on onshore structures made from manufactured tubing or Hollow Structural Sections (HSS). Specific topics deal with: materials, testing and properties; columns and poles; concrete filling; fire protection; fabrication, including bolting, welding and nailing; plastic analysis of connections; welded tube- to-tube connections; braced frames and bracing design; bolted connections; finite element analysis of tubular structures; truss design for 2D triangulated or Vierendeel trusses; 3D space frames; moment-resisting frames and connections; and fatigue of connections.
Prerequisite: CIV312 or equivalent

CIV1180 - Advanced Modelling Methods for Seismic Performance Assessment of Structures
Prof. Oh-Sung Kwon
The objective of the course is to introduce seismic assessment methods for structures through inelastic analyses or advanced experimental simulations. The course mainly consists of three sections: deterministic analytical assessment, reliability-based analytical assessment, and advanced experimental methods. In the first section, numerical models of inelastic structural and geotechnical materials, and various finite element models will be introduced. Built upon these topics, several seismic demand and capacity assessment methods will be presented. Analysis methods for soil-structure-interaction system will be also discussed in this section. In the second section, the fundamentals in structural reliability analysis will be briefly reviewed, which will be followed by a seismic fragility assessment. In the third section, the latest development in advanced experimental methods (experiment-analysis hybrid simulation) will be introduced. While the topics of this course will be presented from a perspective of seismic engineering, the knowledge gained from this course could be applied to research and practice in other areas of structural engineering.
Prerequisite:CIV515 Structural Dynamics

CIV1190H - Structures Under Blast and Impact
Adj. Prof. Michael Seica
The behaviour of structures subjected to accidental or intentional blast or impact loading is exemplified beginning from understanding the nature of threats and blast loading evaluation, to dynamic analysis and specific structural design considerations. Topics presented include:
1. Threat and risk assessment;
2. Explosive processes. Detonation and deflagration;
3. Explosion effects. Loads on structures;
4. Dynamic analysis of structures;
5. Material behaviour under high-strain rate loading;
6. Design of reinforced concrete structures;
7. Design of steel structures;
8. Behaviour of glazing systems;
9. Pressure-impulse diagrams;
10. Industrial explosions;
11. Design for impact loading; and
12. Progressive collapse.
The course addresses the existing lack of expertise in the area of extreme loading on structures and resilience of critical infrastructure, at a time when the need for knowledge in protective design is continuously increasing worldwide. At the forefront of engineering science, the course is unique in Canada and enhances the area of Structural Engineering, in general, and Physical Infrastructure Protection, in particular.

CIV1198H - New Topics In Civil and Mineral Engineering: Design of Structures for Fire Resistance
The main goal of this course is for the students to develop an understanding of the techniques and methodologies for design of building structures in fire, according to the available design codes and standards. The course includes introduction to fire safety in buildings and fire resistance of structures, fire severity, fire loads, e.g., standard fires and real fires, behavior of materials and structures at elevated temperatures, design methods for fire resistance of steel, concrete, and wood (including mass timber) buildings and light frame assemblies, an introduction to the performance-based method for fire resistance design of building structures. Information will be also provided on how to evaluate structures in multi-hazard scenarios such as fire after an earthquake or fire after an explosion. 

CIV1199H - New Topics In Civil and Mineral Engineering: Design of Timber Structures
Prof. Aryan Rezaei Rad
This course aims to train Civil Engineering students to possess in-depth knowledge of timber design. Upon successful completion of the course, students will have the know-how to:
Analyze the physical and mechanical behaviour of wood and wood-based products,
Propose structural wood-based systems,
Employ the principles of limit state design in timber engineering,
Calculate the structural properties and design timber connections, elements, and components,
Incorporate computer-aided design in the design of timber structures, and
Assess the possibilities offered by digital fabrication and advanced heavy timber structures.

CIV1199H - New Topics In Civil and Mineral Engineering: Structural Health Monitoring
Prof. Fae Azhari
Special studies courses are offered when a Professor is available to instruct on a new or unusual topic. Each topic offered constitutes one normal half-course. Special studies course codes may be taken more than once provided that the topic is different each time.

CIV1201H - Concrete Technology and Non-Destructive Testing Principles
Prof. Daman Panesar
This course is focused on theory, principle, practical application, standardization, benefits, and limitations of non-destructive testing (NDT) methods applied to steel reinforced concrete. Techniques to be covered include: condition assessment, surface hardness, penetration resistance, pullout, break-off test, maturity method, pull-off permeability, resonant frequency, UPV, magnetic/electrical, radioactive/nuclear, short pulse radar, acoustic emission, infrared thermography. A review of the role of statistics in experiments, testing and design of experiments in addition to application of significance testing, linear regression analysis and assessment of adequacy of regression models in context with non-destructive techniques will be covered. This course will also include the study of practical case studies and hands on usage of selected NDT testing equipment.

CIV1240H - Building Performance Assessment
Prof. Marianne Touchie
It is well known that significant performance gaps exist between the building design stage and building operation. To ensure buildings achieve predicted performance in terms of resource use and occupant comfort, health and wellbeing, post-occupancy performance assessment is required. This course begins by introducing students to common building performance issues, the existing frameworks and rating systems designed to characterize these issues as well as the three performance gap types: prediction, expectation and outcomes. Next, the relationship between occupants, the building envelope and mechanical systems is explored, including the influence of each of these elements on indoor environmental quality and resource use. Through a field study in an occupied building, students will gain experience with the metrics, measurement methods and data analysis techniques used in the holistic assessment of building performance.

CIV1250H - Instrumentation Techniques for Cement and Concrete Researchers
Prof. Douglas Hooton
The study of Concrete Technology makes use of many test methods not normally associated with Civil Engineering. Methods include those for pore structure and surface area by BET; mercury porosimetry; permeability to vapour, gas and liquids; mineralogy by optical microscopy x-ray diffraction and thermal analysis; microstructure by optical and electron microscope; and chemical analysis by XRF, AA, IR, IC or neutron activation. Published literature will be discussed with respect to differences in such procedures, and interpretation of data.

CIV1252H - Infrastructure Renewal
Hannah Schell
This course deals with the assessment maintenance and repair of concrete structures. Topics covered include: inspection and monitoring of concrete structures (including instrumentation and non-destructive testing); identification of material failure mechanisms; residual service life prediction; life cycle cost analysis; and methods of repair and rehabilitation. Case studies of problems in structures due to reinforcement corrosion, alkali-aggregate reaction and free-thaw cycling will be investigated in detail. Recent advances in inspection and repair techniques will be critically evaluated.

CIV1260H - Chemistry of Cements and Concrete
Prof. Doug Hooton
Prerequisite: CIV 514H
This unique and popular course has been run 6 times previously and consists of lectures covering chemistry, and physics of the following subjects:
Cement Manufacture
Phase Equilibrium & Reactions in Cement Kilns
Supplementary Cementing Materials
Crystal Chemistry of Silicates
Hydration of Cements
Chemical Admixture Effects on Hydration
Microstructure of Cement and Hydrates
Sulphate Reactions and Attack
Alkali-Aggregate Reactions
Chloride and Corrosion Reactions
Chemistry Related to Freezing, Scaling
Course Coordinator: 
Doug Hooton, University of Toronto
Plus Special Lecturers:
Duncan Herfort, Aalborg Portland, Denmark
Karl Petersen, University of Toronto
Lawrence Roberts, Roberts Consulting, USA
Karen Scrivener, EPFL, Switzerland
Larry Sutter, Michigan Tech. University, USA
Michael Thomas, University of New Brunswick
Prerequisites
The participants are expected to have a reasonably advanced knowledge of cements and concrete technology. Graduate students shall have previously taken CIV514: Concrete Technology or a pre-approved equivalent from another university.
Contact Hours
Approximately 27 contact hours during the period of May 15 - 19, 2023. Lectures and any exercises will be given during morning and afternoon sessions, running from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. (to noon on Friday). On Monday May 15, registration. starts at 8:30 a.m. ET.
REGISTRATION PAGE: https://civmin.utoronto.ca/civ1260/

CIV1262H - Microscopy Applied to Building and Geomaterials
Prof. Karl Peterson
This laboratory course covers visible light, electron, and x-ray microscopic methods for the characterization of concrete and geo-materials, including methods of sample preparation. Topics include fluorescent dye impregnation to characterize cracks/grain boundaries/pores, chemical staining procedures, image and quantitative chemical analysis using free software packages (ImageJ, MultiSpec, and DTSA-II). After taking this course students will be able to take a geologic or concrete sample through the entire process of stabilization, preparation (cutting, grinding, polishing) and examination by microscopic methods.

CIV1279H - Construction Contract Documents
Instructor Jiwan Thapar
This course examines various construction contract documents used by government and private bodies. Legal principles and relevant cases are discussed with a view to providing students with an understanding of the legal framework surrounding the documents. Contractual problems including the nature, causes, and quantification of construction claims are also examined. Emphasis is placed on how to avoid construction contract problems, as well as how disputes may be efficiently resolved once they arise. Issues of payment security, bankruptcy, liens and professional liability are also studied.

CIV1281H - Asset Management: Frameworks and Processes
Prof. Tamer El-Diraby

CIV1289H - The Business of Knowledge in Civil Engineering
Prof. Tamer El-Diraby

CIV1285H - Building Information Modelling
Jinyue Zhang
The course is designed to provide students with both hands-on experiences on BIM applications and research exposure to advanced BIM topics. It introduces the basic principles of BIM in most application areas including design, construction, facility management, and sustainability. Hands-on skills required for generating building information models are covered through the use of popular BIM tools. Current research topics and trends of BIM are explored to understand better their impacts to the future of the AEC industry.

CIV1298H - New Topics in Civil and Mineral Engineering: Indoor Air Quality - Moisture, Microbes and Materials
Prof. Sarah Haines
We spend most of our time indoors exposed to a variety of organic and inorganic compounds. Accounting for and minimizing potentially harmful exposures is critical to indoor air quality. Through this course, students will gain new knowledge in the field of indoor air quality and develop skills to engineer solutions to create healthy, sustainable and equitable indoor environments. Focus will be given to moisture transport through materials, water activity, the impact of moisture on organic indoor contaminants such as bioaerosols, and methodologies to prevent, remediate and monitor indoor mould growth. Further, this course will investigate tools, such as next-generation sequencing and bioinformatics, used to characterize indoor microbiomes and bioaerosols. Interest will also be given to issues in indoor environmental quality specifically in Indigenous housing as well as low-socioeconomic communities in Canada. Through a course project, students will engineer a solution using resources and skills developed throughout the course for a particular issue of interest in indoor air quality.

CIV1299H - New Topics in Civil and Mineral Engineering:  Advanced Technologies for Smart Buildings - Energy Performance and Indoor Environmental Quality
Prof. Seungjae Lee
This course provides students with knowledge of advanced technologies and explores their potential in realizing smart buildings. It focuses on how these cutting-edge technologies can enhance building energy performance and indoor environmental quality. It primarily consists of four parts. In the first part, students will explore diverse modelling approaches for building, system, and disturbance (including occupant) modelling. The course will delve into forward (physics-based), inverse (data-driven), and hybrid modelling approaches. The second part of the course centers around the optimal control of building energy systems. Students will gain a deep understanding of two widely used techniques: model predictive control and reinforcement learning. The third part introduces students to modern methods for automated fault detection and diagnostics. Key topics include the concept of digital twinning, which allows for the virtual representation of physical systems, and anomaly detection methods. In the last part of the course, students will focus on sensors and user interfaces. Throughout the course, students will engage in hands-on exercises to enhance their practical skills and gain valuable experience. They will have the opportunity to implement and test different technologies in virtual environments using computer emulators and physical mock-up models developed with Raspberry Pi. 
Pre-requisite:  CIV375/575 or equivalent; CME538 or equivalent 

CIV1283H - New Topics In Civil & Mineral Engineering: Asset Management: Quantitative tools and methods
Hesham Osman
This course presents a number of quantitative tools and analytical methods for the asset manager. Topics covered include data modelling and management, stochastic and deterministic models for asset deterioration, models for optimal asset repair/replacement decisions, tools for asset risk assessment, multi-criteria decision-making models in the context of asset management problems, and infrastructure resiliency and adaptation for climate change. Two guest lecturers will be invited to present current practices and emerging trends. A course project will involve the application of tools and methods presented in class on actual infrastructure data sets.
Special studies courses are offered when a Professor is available to instruct on a new or unusual topic. Each topic offered constitutes one normal half-course. Special studies course codes may be taken more than once provided that the topic is different each time.

CIV1299 - New Topics In Civil & Mineral Engineering: Construction Safety: IoT and AI Solutions
Daeho Kim
A construction project is a series of consecutive tasks to be done in wild and uncertain conditions, which involve a great number of uncertainties, requiring improvisational decision making as well as fine dexterity of workers. The construction industry has thus relied on the workforce as a major driver of productivity, and thus it is the most critical resource that should be given top management priority for any successful construction project.
This course is to develop students’ in-depth understanding on the management of construction workforce. Specifically, this course will tackle worker safety and ergonomics, a chronic problem of the construction industry, teaching a range of theories, practices, and potential smart technologies for the management of worker safety and ergonomics (e.g., unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), proximity sensor, inertial measurement unit (IMU), computer vision, and deep neural network (DNN)).
Topics discussed include: (1) introduction to construction workers, trades, and unions; (2) fundamentals on construction labour laws, regulations, and insurances; (3) accident and ergonomics theories; (4) onsite measures for safety and ergonomics management; and (5) advanced sensing technologies for automated safety monitoring.

CIV1297H - New Topics In Civil and Mineral Engineering: Introduction To Corrosion
Ibrahim Ogunsanya
The Civil industry, like many other engineering industries, has been plagued with corrosion degradation problems. In 2016, the National Association of Corrosion Engineers estimated US$2.5 trillion, which is ~ 3.4% of the global Gross Domestic Product (GDP), as the annual global cost of corrosion. In Canada, the annual estimated direct corrosion cost of corrosion across all sectors is US$46.4 billion, ~2.5% of Canada’s GDP. Therefore, we need to establish cost-effective control strategies underpinned by a sound fundamental understanding of corrosion mechanisms on different metal alloys to reduce the enormous cost of corrosion and aid the sustainable development of new structures. Students will be exposed to corrosion problems in different engineering sectors. We will look at electrochemical reactions; mechanisms and kinetics/rates of corrosion; modes of corrosive attack including stress corrosion cracking and hydrogen embrittlement; corrosion mitigation and prevention through proper materials selection, design, cathodic and anodic protection, and coatings to increase the structure’s service life; and overall discussion on technologically important material-environment combinations.

CIV1299H - New Topics in Civil and Mineral Engineering: Virtualization & Analytics in Construction
Prof. Tamer El-Diraby

CIV1299H - New Topics in Civil and Mineral Engineering: Introduction to Construction Claims
Prof. Jiwan Thapar
This course is designed for students and professionals in the construction industry looking to advance their understanding of construction claims. The course will provide attendees with techniques to manage the unique contractual challenges that come from different construction project delivery methods and which could lead to cost intensive disputes)

CIV1302H - Low Impact Development and Stormwater Systems
Civil Engineering is the oldest branch of engineering. In ancient times, architects, engineers and planners were one and the same. In landscape design, these three disciplines are still closely linked particularly in the design and construction of green infrastructure, low impact develop and stormwater infrastructure. In this course the design of stormwater management systems will be taught with a multi-disciplinary approach. Impacts to the flow regime, water balances, flow paths, water quality and aquatic habitats will be discussed. The low impact development (LID) design approach will be examined as a tool for sustainable urban planning. Some topics covered in this course include:
Conventional systems (stormwater management ponds)
Vegetated stormwater systems (green roofs, bioretention)
Infiltration systems (permeable pavements, exfiltration cells
Treatment systems (oil-grit separators, filter strips)
Modelling approaches.
Sediment and erosion control and operational considerations.

CIV1303H - Water Resources Systems Modelling
Prof. Bryan Karney
Water resources systems are physically complex and the solution of appropriate mathematical models is computationally demanding. This course considers physical processes in water resource systems, their mathematical representation and numerical solutions. Newton's 2nd law and the equations of mass and energy conservation are developed and applied to closed-conduit, open-channel and groundwater flow problems. Procedures for efficient numerical solution of the governing equations are presented. Problems of non-linearity, sensitivity to data and computational complexity are introduced.
Prerequisite: EDV250H1 or permission of the instructor.

CIV1307H - Life Cycle Assessment and Sustainability of Engineering Activities
Engineers face growing pressure to incorporate sustainability objectives into their practice. In comparing two products/designs it is often not apparent which one is more sustainable. The course introduces concepts and methods for sustainability assessment. The course primarily focuses on Life Cycle Assessment as it is viewed as being a necessary component of any assessment. This is a research based course and is suitable for students interested in researching in depth a particular topic. By the end of the course, students will have an awareness of analytical tools/resources for evaluating sustainability implications employing a systems perspective, and have applied these tools in a research project. This course assumes students have a background in engineering and have taken a course in engineering economics. 2 lecture hours per week.

CIV1308H - Physical and Chemical Treatment Processes
Theory and application of physical and chemical operations and processes for the treatment of water and wastewater. Specific processes covered include sedimentation, coagulation, filtration, and disinfection, with an overview of reactor theory. Laboratory experiments are designed to support and demonstrate the lecture material.
It is expected that students have taken a previous undergraduate level course in basic water/wastewater treatment.

CIV1309H - Biological Treatment Processes
Prof. Susan Andrews
Theory and application of physical and chemical operations and processes for the treatment of water and wastewater. Specific processes covered include sedimentation, coagulation, filtration, and disinfection, with an overview of reactor theory. Laboratory experiments are designed to support and demonstrate the lecture material.

CIV1311H - Advanced and Sustainable Drinking Water Treatment
Prof. Bob Andrews
enrollment preference will be given to students in the Advanced Water Technologies & Process Design specialization, and the Drinking Water Research Group.
This course covers sustainability issues as they apply to the provision of safe drinking water. Water reclamation and reuse topics focus on strategies that allow wastewater to be treated for indirect potable reuse as well as many other purposes. Other major topics include: risk assessment associated with emerging pathogens and chemical constituents present in source waters, advanced drinking water treatment processes including membranes (UF, NF and RO), advanced oxidation and activated carbon. Throughout the course, case studies, application examples and numerical problems will be presented.

CIV1319H - Chemistry and Analysis of Water and Wastes
Prof. Susan Andrews
This course deals with the major chemical processes occurring in aqueous environments, in both natural systems and treatment systems. The topics covered include: chemical thermodynamics and kinetics; acid/base chemistry; quantitative equilibrium calculations; acid-base titrations; dissolved CO2 chemistry; mineral solution chemistry; complexation; redox reactions; and the solid-solution interface. The lectures are complemented by laboratory experiments in which students learn some of the standard analysis techniques of aquatic chemistry.
Note: priority is given to CIV/MIN research-stream students and M.Eng. students who require this course to complete a technical emphasis

CIV1319H - Chemistry and Analysis of Water and Wastes
Prof. Susan Andrews
This course deals with the major chemical processes occurring in aqueous environments, in both natural systems and treatment systems. The topics covered include: chemical thermodynamics and kinetics; acid/base chemistry; quantitative equilibrium calculations; acid-base titrations; dissolved CO2 chemistry; mineral solution chemistry; complexation; redox reactions; and the solid-solution interface. The lectures are complemented by laboratory experiments in which students learn some of the standard analysis techniques of aquatic chemistry.
Note: priority is given to CIV/MIN research-stream students and M.Eng. students who require this course to complete a technical emphasis

CIV1320H - Indoor Air Quality
Prof. Jeffrey Siegel
Contaminants in indoor air have enormous impact on human health, productivity, building energy use and sustainability. This course focuses on important contaminants, fundamental tools and methodologies to measure and model the indoor environment, and on engineering solutions to improve indoor air quality. The course covers a rationale and motivation for the investigation of indoor contaminants, important contaminants and sources, the use of mass balances to assess indoor concentrations, fundamental transport and transformation processes that occur indoors, indoor exposure assessment, and methodologies to assess costs and benefits for technologies and techniques to improve indoor air. The course explicitly links the air inside of buildings to building materials, energy use, outdoor air quality, and human health.

CIV1321H - Large Scale Infrastructure and Sustainability
Prof. Shoshanna Saxe
The next 15 years will see major changes in the global infrastructure system. To meet local, national and international sustainability goals, this next generation of infrastructure must be planned, designed and built in new ways. Large scale infrastructure projects have impacts well beyond their stated primary purpose: they consume significant amounts of natural resources and, once built, change how we live, work and move. As key players in planning, designing, constructing and commissioning large infrastructure projects, engineers have a special responsibility to understand the myriad ways infrastructure interacts with our natural and social systems. This course will explore what sustainability means in the context of infrastructure development, examine infrastructure needs and sustainability at the global and project scale, and provide students with skills and techniques to have an impact on infrastructure sustainability in their future work. At the end of this course, students will be able to think critically about the wider impacts of large-scale infrastructure projects and use this knowledge alongside their technical engineering skills to develop better outcomes. Students will learn approaches and skills for analysing (and influencing) the sustainability of infrastructure systems at the project and system scale.

CIV1322 - Quantitative Methods for Decision-Making
Prof. Daniel Posen
This course introduces students to core principles and quantitative methods to provide support for making ‘hard’ decisions, and communicating results. Topics include structured decision-making techniques (e.g., decision trees), public sector decision making (e.g., benefit-cost analysis, welfare economics), multi-criteria decision-making, and decision making under uncertainty (e.g., sensitivity analysis, Monte Carlo simulation, utility theory and risk attitudes).

CIV1330H - Water, Sanitation, Hygiene and Global Health
Adj. Prof. Ray Cantwell
This course focuses on water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) in low-income settings from an engineering and environmental health perspective. With respect to water, the course will cover drinking water quality and quantity, water access, and appropriate water treatment and storage options. The course will cover aspects of sanitation promotion, sanitation in challenging environments, and fecal sludge management. Hygiene topics will include disease transmission, handwashing station design, and theory and practice of hygiene behaviour, education and behaviour change. Local and national governance in WASH will also be explored

CIV1398H - New Topics in Civil and Mineral Engineering: Treatment Wetland
Prof. Elodie Passeport
This  course  introduces  the  functioning  and  design  of  various  passive  water  treatment  systems  for environmental  remediation.  We  will  review  the  historical  development  of  constructed  wetlands from ecological engineering principles, the typical surface flow and subsurface flow wetlands, and the  more  recent  unit  process  wetland  design  approach.  We  will  describe  low  impact  development systems  and  focus  on  their  role  for  water  quality  improvement,  e.g.,  in  bioretention  cells.
We will cover hydrology, hydraulics, biogeochemical processes, and the role of vegetation in passive water treatment systems. We will also describe approaches for monitoring natural attenuation in contaminated groundwater. The course presents the fate of the main class of contaminants including:  suspended  solids,  biological  oxygen  demand,  nitrogen  species,  phosphorus,  metals  and metalloids,  and  organic  chemicals  such  as  chlorinated  aromatics,  pesticides,  pharmaceuticals,  and personal care products.

CIV1398H - New Topics In Civil and Mineral Engineering: Changing Human Habits with sensors and Design
Prof. David Meyer
Global engineering projects often fail because they do not account for how and why people change their behaviours and habits. Understanding and changing habits can improve health and wellbeing globally and locally (e.g., preventing bullying, increasing handwashing, ending open defecation). Similarly, creating habits can cause technologies to scale rapidly and profitably (e.g. smart phones, fidget spinners).
To understand how and why humans change their habits and/or behaviour, this course draws on theories from health sciences, social sciences, and behavioural economics. Case studies will focus primarily on successful and unsuccessful examples of behavior change projects in the international development sector. Case study and theory readings will form the foundation for weekly seminar discussions.
In a hands-on, independent design project, students will learn how hard changing habits can be when they try to change one of their own habits and build a sensor to measure if their habit changes. This course will leave students with a deepened understanding of how hard it can be to change humans’ habits and of the promise and limitations of sensors and technology in global engineering and health.

CIV1399H - New Topics In Civil and Mineral Engineering: Climate change and implications for engineering systems

CIV1399H - New Topics In Civil and Mineral Engineering: Environmental Remediation with Passive Water Treatment Systems
Prof. Elodie Passeport

CIV1399H - New Topics In Civil and Mineral Engineering: Strategies & Applications for Meeting Net Zero Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Ian Sinclair
As governments around the world make long term commitments to zero carbon futures, how to accomplish them is the next challenging yet very necessary next step. Identifying where attainable reductions can be made, what policy decisions are needed to drive transformation change and associated capital flows, then considering how best to deploy technology, must all be identified in order for meaningful action to follow those commitments.
It is often said that all the necessary technical tools are already in place to solve climate change. Question is: how to deploy them and how does that deployment affect the status quo? Are there others that will need to be fast-tracked to make up any shortfall? How does an approach in one location affect others?
The course will begin with the basics of climate science and carbon cycles, coupled with an understanding of Earth’s natural energy budget and balance. Where are our emissions currently and what reductions are being promised? Students will evaluate Canada and the world’s carbon budgets, before focusing on key Canadian GHG generation sectors that this course is targeting: fossil fuel production, transportation, energy generation & delivery, buildings, efficiency, industry, farming, forestry and soils, all aligning with our current GHG footprint. We will introduce more international perspectives as and when appropriate.
There will be a review of the history and functioning of primary and secondary energy generation & distribution systems. Students will study both the potential for disruption and mitigation strategies necessary for the mass adoption of intermittent generation, the electrification of heating and the elimination of carbon from transportation
in particular. Energy storage will be a key part of this review. Buildings will be considered - both for the potential efficiency gains to be achieved and for technological changes to displace fossil fuel consumption.
We will consider where Canada’s largest industrial emitters must move to in order to eliminate their carbon contributions, recognizing the transitional role of cement, iron and steel, fossil fuels and the existing economic systems that rely on them. Hydrogen’s potential role will be considered, alongside carbon capture and storage.
Finally, students will consider farming and forestry as potential carbon sequestration interventions, given Canada’s enormous farming and forestry sectors and our unique custody of one of the world’s greatest carbon sinks.
Each of these broad areas will be viewed through multiple lenses, aimed at understanding all drivers necessary for both widespread and sustainable intervention: policy, political, economic, environmental, financial, technical. The intent is for students to appreciate that there are multiple strands associated with the successful and widespread adoption of any new technology, while appreciating the significant systemic changes that mass adoption will bring.
Informal Prerequisites. A recognition of and an interest in gaining a broad perspective across both natural and manufactured environments. A desire to learn about and appreciation for multi-faceted approaches to tackling climate change, including both technical and non-technical, all with a keen eye on quantification, policy and economics.

CIV1404H - Numerical Methods in Geomechanics
This course is designed to provide students with the necessary knowledge and skills to develop, implement and interpret numerical models for geotechnical engineering problems. The course will cover the theoretical background of numerical modelling techniques, including finite element method (FEM), finite difference method (FDM) and boundary element method (BEM), and their application to geotechnical problems such as soil mechanics, foundation engineering, slope stability, and underground excavation. The course will also emphasize on the importance of model verification and validation, and will provide students with practical skills in software applications and programming for numerical modelling.

CIV1420H - Soil Properties and Behaviour
Prof. Murray Grabinsky
The fundamental concepts of soil mechanics and foundation engineering presented at the undergraduate level will be further developed in the context of advanced topics including: undrained loading and soil liquefaction; coupled hydro-mechanical modeling using Biot theory; cemented soils; unsaturated soil mechanics; constitutive models and laboratory test methods; and field monitoring techniques. Extensive reading assignments will be given. Research papers, numerical modeling assignments, and class presentations will be used as the basis for evaluation.

CIV1422H - Dynamic Response of Engineering Materials
Fundamental theories and applications of response and failure of engineering materials (e.g. rocks, concretes, steels, polymers and glass) under highly dynamic loading. Topics include elastic and plastic stress wave propagation, failure and fracture theory under rapidly varying loads, dynamic fracture toughness, nucleation and propagation of the damage in materials and their theoretical and experimental quantification.
Lectures will be supplemented by selected laboratory exercises involving the newly built state-of-the-art Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar facilities, to illustrate the physics of dynamic loading, strain-rate effects, and high-velocity fracture in engineering materials
Prerequisite: CIV521H or equivalent

CIV1425H - Continuum Mechanics and Modelling of Soil Behaviour
(previously listed as CIV1498 Constitutive Modelling in Geomaterials)
Prof. Mason Ghafghazi
The CIV1425 course (Continuum Mechanics and Modelling of Material Behaviour) is designed for graduate students who are interested in learning how solid materials such as steel, soil, and rock respond to loading and deformation. Constitutive models are mathematical constructs founded on fundamental mechanics that relate loads and deformations through various components of stresses and strains. Students will learn how to use tensors to describe stresses and strains in 3D space, what various loading conditions solids may experience, how solid materials respond to loading by elastic and plastic deformations, and how presence of other material phases such as fluids may contribute to material behaviour.
The course includes three main sections: First a summary of some continuum mechanics concepts including tensor notation and operations, deformation gradient, strain and stress tensors, principal vectors, and invariants will be explained. Then basic concepts from plasticity including definitions of elastic and plastic strains, yielding, hardening, coaxially, normality and flow rule will be introduced. The final and most extensive part of the course includes going through a range of constitutive relations starting with classic elasto-plastic models and moving on to classic and advanced critical state and bounding surface plasticity models. Materials will be general in nature, but examples and some of the specific models will focus on soil behaviour. The course will be useful to all students who are studying Geomechanics, and those Structural Engineering students who are interested in modelling material behaviour, or soil-structure interaction.

CIV1429H - Advanced Rock Engineering: Fractured Rock Masses
Rock masses can be defined as made of intact rock blocks and discontinuities (joints, faults, etcâ€¦). It is the presence of those weak features that determine the overall hydro-mechanical response of the rock mass that engineers observe in the field. Therefore, to correctly engineer any structure in rock, we cannot relay only on the mechanical properties of the intact rock, but we need to be able to properly understand the role that fractures play on the overall behaviour that we observe, and how to account for them during the different phases of the rock engineering design.
This course will try to address this specific issue by presenting the latest scientific discoveries and engineering approaches in the field. It will also present students with innovative methodologies for the quantification of fracture shear strength, rock mass mapping, and rock mass modeling tools such as the Combined Finite-Discrete Element Method for simulating damage and fracture in geomaterials

CIV1430H - Engineering Rock Mechanics
Prof. John Harrison
All geotechnical engineers will at some time in their careers be involved with projects that includes elements of rock mechanics or rock engineering (in general, rock in Toronto is only about 15m or less below ground surface). This introductory graduate-level course is aimed at students who have studied soil mechanics and geotechnical engineering at undergraduate level, and who wish to expand their knowledge to include a fundamental understanding of rock mechanics and rock engineering. The course covers fundamental components of rock mechanics (in situ stress, discontinuities, intact rock, rock masses, heterogeneity) before moving on to rock engineering topics (rock excavation and stabilization, foundations and slopes, underground excavations). The course uses an inverted classroom model: material is delivered asynchronously via video lectures, with all in-person sessions being devoted to tutorials and other problem-solving activities. Various workshops and laboratory sessions are included.

CIV1497HS1 - New Topics in Civil & Mineral Engineering: Reliability-based Design in Rock Engineering
Prof. John Harrison
Modern engineering design codes embrace reliability-based design, and this philosophy is being introduced into geotechnical engineering. However, the application of RBD to rock engineering is not straightforward. Drawing on the instructor’s unique close involvement in the ongoing development of Eurocode 7, this course presents the latest understanding and developments in RBD for rock engineering. The following topics are included: rationale for RBD; computing the probability of failure; simple examples of RBD; application of FORM to rock engineering problems; the problem of limited data; the problem of non-probabilistic uncertainty. Course delivery is via in-person tutorials supported by directed reading and problem-solving.

CIV1498HS1 - New Topics In Civil and Mineral Engineering: Rock Engineering Design Practice
Prof. John Hadjigeorgiou
This course addresses the fundamentals and practical considerations of reinforcement and support for surface and underground excavations in rock. Topics covered include: Rock mass behaviour and failure mechanisms; Ground support elements and specifications; Ground support "action" and "reaction"; Ground support practice; Data required for support system design; Approaches to ground support design: analytical, empirical, numerical modelling, probabilistic; Monitoring of reinforcement and support; Case studies.

CIV1499H - New Topics In Civil and Mineral Engineering: Applications of Urban Geology in Civil Engineering
David Staseff
This course will provide students with the foundation for an understanding of geology as it applies to civil / geotechnical engineering in urban areas. Topics include the role and importance of geology in civil / geotechnical engineering practice, including glacial geology and landforms, hydrogeology, urban geology of Canadian cities and case studies with practical applications. This course will not address mining, mineral or rock engineering.

CIV1498H - New Topics In Civil and Mineral Engineering:   Exploration, Studies, Resources and Reserves
This course aims to provide the participants with a management perspective of the mineral industry, exposing them to strategies, concepts, issues, and solutions that will enable them to become mineral industry leaders. The course will introduce the best practices and practical challenges in mineral exploration, resource and reserve estimation and mineral exploration project valuations. The unique aspect of this course is that the presenters are practicing industry professionals, each of whom is an expert in their field.  The result is that each module offers a uniquely practical viewpoint on its topic.

CIV1499H - New Topics in Civil & Mineral Engineering: Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering
Prof. Mason Ghafghazi
Students will learn about the physical processes that cause earthquakes and how they are used to quantify the effects of earthquakes on built environment. Basic dynamics concepts will be introduced and used to understand how site effects influence the load transferred to structures. Liquefaction will be introduced as a primary source of earthquake-induced damaged to all types of structures and various methods of assessing its potential and consequences will be studied. This course is a necessity for anyone working in geotechnical engineering concerning seismically active parts of the world, and useful to those in earthquake structural engineering area.
Prerequisite CIV 324 or equivalent: Students are expected to be knowledgeable about or self-study background materials related to soil mechanics, complex numbers and Fourier transform.

CIV1504H - Applied Probability and Statistics in Civil Engineering
Prof. Khandker Nurul Habib
A lecture and tutorial course designed to build on the prerequisite introduction to probability in the form of applied probability and statistics with emphasis on techniques appropriate for investigating the random behaviour of complex civil engineering systems. Topics include: a review of probability theory; extreme value distributions; engineering reliability; conditional distributions; applications of common probability models; parameter estimation and confidence intervals; significance testing; elementary Bayesian analysis; simple stochastic processes.
Prerequisite: CIV263H1 or equivalent.

CIV1505H - Transportation Research Seminars
Prof. Marianne Hatzopoulou
This is a credit/non-credit seminar series that is mandatory for research students in the Transportation Research Group. This course does not count toward program course requirements. Talk to your supervisor for more information on how this course fits into your program.

CIV1506H - Freight Transportation and ITS Applications
Prof. Matthew Roorda
Efficient movement of freight is crucial for national economic viability. This course introduces the structure of the freight industry and relates it to business logistics and planning of supply chains. Planning of freight services at the strategic, tactical, and operational levels is presented and models of international, inter-city, and urban freight movements are introduced. Shipper behavior related to mode choice, carrier selection, adoption of 3-PL and information technology options is considered. The course also introduces the role of advanced technologies (ITS) in improving freight operations, and the implications of e-commerce on planning of freight services. The course concludes by providing an overview of policy issues, data sources and needs, and the particularities of the Canadian freight transportation context.

CIV1508H - Airport Planning and Engineering
The objective of this course is to provide an overview of the planning, design and operation of the airport component of a modern air/highway inter-modal transportation system including airside, terminal and groundside elements. Students will be introduced to current trends in the air transportation industry as these impact on air travel demand and the requirement for airport facilities and services. Aviation demand forecasting and management will be studied, as will aircraft and passenger characteristics. A central focus of the course will be airfield (runways and taxiways) and terminal design, both passenger and cargo. While Canadian standards will be used in all design examples and exercises, these are generally compatible with ICAO recommended practices and the analytic methods broadly applicable elsewhere. Case Studies will draw heavily on the current Master Plan being developed for Pickering Airport and the ongoing development program at Toronto's Lester B. Pearson International Airport. The course will conclude with a brief look at the critical environmental issues facing airports, particularly noise and water pollution, and at airport economics and finance.

CIV1532H - Fundamentals of ITS and Traffic Management
This course focuses on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) with emphasis on Advanced Traffic Control and Management Systems (ATMS) and applications of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in ATMS. Topics include:
Overview and Introduction to ITS
Traffic Flow Modeling for ITS: Macroscopic, Microscopic and Mesoscopic
Transportation Networks Modeling and Traffic Assignment
Genetic Algorithms (GA) for Optimization (Artificial Intelligence Part I)
Applications of GA: Emergency Evacuation Optimization, Origin-Destination Estimation, Dynamic Congestion Pricing
Artificial Neural Networks (Artificial Intelligence Part II)
Applications of NN: Automated Incident Detection (AID), Short-Term Traffic Flow Forecasting,
Traffic Control and Optimization Theoretical Primer
Reinforcement Learning (Artificial Intelligence Part III)
Introduction to Deep Learning (Deep NN + RL)
Freeway Traffic Control and Optimization
Street Traffic Control and Optimization
Other Research Topics (time permitting), e.g. Modelling and Exploiting Vehicle Automation and Connectivity for 21s Century Traffic Control.
Prerequisite: None, CIV332 or equivalent highly recommended

CIV1535H - Transportation and Development
Prof. Eric Miller
The land use - transportation interaction is the focus of this course. Basic concepts underlying urban spatial processes are introduced. Land use forecasting models used to project future land use (principally population and employment distributions) for input into transportation planning studies are presented. Models reviewed include the Lowry Model, econometric-based models and urban simulation techniques. The remainder of the course deals with the qualitative and quantitative assessment of impacts of major transportation facilities on land use patterns. A term project dealing with the analysis of the impact of a current transportation proposal within the Greater Toronto Area on adjacent land use constitutes an important component of the course work.
Prerequisite: CIV531H

CIV1536H - Modelling Transport Emissions
Prof. Marianne Hatzopoulou

CIV1538H - Transportation Demand Analysis
Prof. Khandker Nurul Habib
This course deals with the quantitative analysis and modeling of transportation demand for planning purposes. The course principally deals with urban passenger demand, but an introduction to freight and intercity travel demand is also provided. A theoretical framework for the study of transportation demand is developed from basic micro-economic principles of consumer behaviour. The primary modeling approaches considered are: disaggregate choice models; entropy-based models, and an introduction to the activity-based approach to travel demand modeling. An understanding of the theory of the demand for transportation is coupled with practical experience in the specification, estimation, and use of transportation demand models.
Prerequisites: CIV531H1,CIV1504H

CIV1540H - Transportation: Urban Operations Research
Prof. Amer Shalaby
This course focuses on quantitative methods and techniques for the analysis and modelling of urban transportation systems. Major topics include probabilistic modelling, queuing models of transport operations, network models, and simulation of transportation systems. The application of these methods to modelling various components of the transportation system (including road, transit and pedestrian facilities) is emphasized in this course.

CME500H - Fundamentals of Acid Rock Drainage
Prof. Lesley Warren
Geochemistry of acid rock / acid mine drainage (ARD/AMD) which covers the role of bacteria in generating this global mining pollution issue and how mines currently treat and attempt to prevent it. An introduction to the underlying chemical reactions involved, the role of microbes in these processes and the mitigation and treatment strategies currently available.
Course offering pending Faculty Council approval for 2018-19 academic year.
Prerequisite: APS110H1/CHE112H1 or equivalent.

CME525H1 - Tunneling and Urban Excavation
Introduces fundamental concepts of underground tunneling and its impact on surrounding urban environment. Topics: role of geology on the choice of tunneling methodology; classical and mechanized tunneling excavation methods; interaction between tunnel and surrounding structures; tunnel support methodologies; innovation and current research in tunneling and underground construction.

CME538H - Introduction to Data Science for Civil and Mineral Engineers
Prof. Sebastian Goodfellow
Data Science is redefining how people and organizations solve challenging problems and has become an essential skill for engineers in the 21st-century. This intermediate-level class bridges between APS106 (Fundamentals of Computer Programming) and CME263 (Probability Theory for Civil and Mineral Engineers) and upper-level machine learning, computer science and statistics courses.
In this course, we explore key areas of Data Science including question formulation, data collection and cleaning, visualization, and applied machine learning. All lessons are taught with Python code and a strong emphasis is placed on the development of a solid foundation in programming. This course touches on a range of topics from visualization to machine learning which we believe serves to enhance the learning experience for students by allowing them to gain an appreciation for the close interplay between these topics

MIN511H - Integrated Mine Waste Engineering
Prof. Murray Grabinsky

MIN565 - Design and Support of Underground Mine Excavations
Geomechanical issues concerning the design of underground openings in hard rock are covered in the course: ground support [i.e. rock mass reinforcement] design, the dimensioning and sequencing of underground excavations and rock pillar design in hard rock applications. A review of modern concepts concerning rock and rock mass failure modes with application to support design is given. Both static and dynamic [rockburst] support design issues are addresses. Lastly instrumentation and monitoring techniques and backfill design and behaviour are also covered. Design issues are illustrated through the use of numerous field case studies .

MIN520 - Mine Optimization
Introduces principles and fundamental concepts involved in the optimization of different aspects of mineral resource extraction. Explores the key sources of uncertainty that affect a final mine plan and design such as orebody, technological and economic uncertainties. Stochastic simulation techniques will be introduced for the quantification of uncertainties and risk management.
Other topics related to optimizing mine production and performance such as delaying or eliminating waste stripping, and more efficient resource use through better blending and cut-off grade decisions, as well as holistic mine-to-mill process optimization will be introduced.
Prerequisite: MIN250H1, MIN351H1, MIN466H1

MIE504H - Applied Computational Fluid Dynamics
The course is designed for Students with no or little Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) knowledge who want to learn CFD application to solve engineering problems. The course will provide a general perspective to the CFD and its application to fluid flow and heat transfer and it will teach the use of some of the popular CFD packages and provides them with the necessary tool to use CFD in specific applications. Students will also learn basics of CFD and will use that basic knowledge to learn Fluent Ansys CFD software. Most CFD packages have a variety of modules to deal with a specific type of flow. Students will be introduced to different modules and their specific applications. They will then be able to utilize the CFD package to simulate any particular problem. Ansys software will be the commercial package that will be used in this course. Ansys Fluent is the most common commercial CFD code available and most of the engineering companies use this code for their research & development and product analysis.

MIE505H - Micro/Nano Robotics
This course will cover the design, modeling, fabrication, and control of miniature robot and micro/nano-manipulation systems for graduate and upper level undergraduate students. Micro and Nano robotics is an interdisciplinary field which draws on aspects of microfabrication, robotics, medicine and materials science. In addition to basic background material, the course includes case studies of current micro/nano-systems, challenges and future trends, and potential applications. The course will focus on a team design project involving novel theoretical and/or experimental concepts for micro/nano-robotic systems with a team of students. Throughout the course, discussions and lab tours will be organized on selected topics.

MIE506H - MEMS Design and Microfabrication
This course will present the fundamental basis of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). Topics will include: micromachining/microfabrication techniques, micro sensing and actuation principles and design, MEMS modeling and simulation, and device characterization and packaging. Students will be required to complete a MEMS design term project, including design modeling, simulation, microfabrication process design, and photolithographic mask layout.

MIE507H - HVAC Fundamentals
Introduction to the fundamentals of HVAC system operation and the relationship between these systems, building occupants and the building envelope. Fundamentals of psychrometrics, heat transfer and refrigeration; determination of heating and cooling loads driven by occupant requirements and the building envelope; heating and cooling equipment types and HVAC system configurations; controls and maintenance issues that influence performance; evaluation of various HVAC systems with respect to energy and indoor environmental quality performance.

MIE515H - Alternative Energy Systems
This course covers the basic principles, current technologies and applications of selected alternative energy systems. Specific topics include solar thermal systems, solar photovoltaic systems, wind, wave, and tidal energy, energy storage, and grid connections issues.

MIE516H - Combustion and Fuels
Introduction to combustion theory. Chemical equilibrium and the products of combustion. Combustion kinetics and types of combustion. Pollutant formation. Design of combustion systems for gaseous, liquid and solid fuels. The use of alternative fuels (hydrogen, biofuels, etc.) and their effect on combustion systems.

MIE517H - Fuel Cell Systems
Thermodynamics and electrochemistry of fuel cell operation and testing; understanding of polarization curves and impedance spectroscopy; common fuel cell types, materials, components, and auxiliary systems; high and low temperature fuel cells and their applications in transportation and stationary power generation, including co-generation and combined heat and power systems; engineering system requirements resulting from basic fuel cell properties and characteristics.

MIE519H - Advanced Manufacturing Technologies
This course is designed to provide an integrated multidisciplinary approach to Advanced Manufacturing Engineering, and provide a strong foundation including fundamentals and applications of advanced manufacturing (AM). Topics include: additive manufacturing, 3D printing, micro- and nano-manufacturing, continuous & precision manufacturing, green and biological manufacturing. New applications of AM in sectors such as automotive, aerospace, biomedical, and electronics.

MIE520H - Biotransport Phenomena
Application of conservation relations and momentum balances, dimensional analysis and scaling, mass transfer, heat transfer, and fluid flow to biological systems, including: transport in the circulation, transport in porous media and tissues, transvascular transport, transport of gases between blood and tissues, and transport in organs and organisms.

MIE523H - Engineering Psychology and Human Performance
An examination of the relation between behavioural science and the design of human-machine systems, with special attention to advanced control room design. Human limitations on perception, attention, memory and decision making, and the design of displays and intelligent machines to supplement them. The human operator in process control and the supervisory control of automated and robotic systems. Laboratory exercises to introduce techniques of evaluating human performance.

MIE524H - Data Mining
Introduction to data mining and machine learning algorithms for very large datasets; Emphasis on creating scalable algorithms using MapReduce and Spark, as well as modern machine learning frameworks. Algorithms for high-dimensional data. Data mining and machine learning with large-scale graph data. Handling infinite data streams. Modern applications of scalable data mining and machine learning algorithms.

MIE533H - Non-Destructive Evaluation
The course is designed for students who are interested in more advanced studies of applying wave principles to engineering applications in the field of non-destructive testing (NDT) and imaging (NDI). Topics will cover: Review of principles and characteristics of sound and ultrasonic waves; thermal waves; optical (light) waves; photons: light waves behaving as particles; black body radiation, continuous wave and pulsed lasers. The course will focus on NDT and NDI applications in component inspection and medical diagnostics using ultrasonics, laser photothermal radiometry, thermography and dynamic infrared imaging.

MIE535H - Electrification Through Electricity Markets
Challenges of meeting net-zero, fundamentals of markets, structures and participants, spot markets, economic dispatch, day-ahead markets, optimal unit commitment, forward markets, settlement process, storage and demand management, renewable and distributed energy resources, trading over transmission networks, nodal pricing, reliability resources, generation and transmission capacity investment models, capacity markets.

MIE540H - Product Design
This course takes a 360° perspective on product design: beginning at the market need, evolving this need into a concept, and optimizing the concept. Students will gain an understanding of the steps involved and the tools utilized in developing new products. The course will integrate both business and engineering concepts seamlessly through examples, case studies and a final project. Some of the business concepts covered include: identifying customer needs, project management and the economics of product design. The engineering design tools include: developing product specifications, concept generation, concept selection, Product Functional Decomposition diagrams, orthogonal arrays, full and fractional factorials, noises, interactions, tolerance analysis and latitude studies. Specific emphasis will be placed on robust and tunable technology for product optimization.

MIE542H - Human Factors Integration
The integration of human factors into engineering projects. Human factors integration (HFI) process and systems constraints, HFI tools, and HFI best practices. Modelling, economics, and communication of HFI problems. Examples of HFI drawn from energy, healthcare, military, and software systems. Application of HFI theory and methods to a capstone design project, including HFI problem specification, concept generation, and selection through an iterative and open-ended design process.

MIE550H - Advanced Momentum, Heat and Mass Transfer
This course observes: conservation of mass, momentum, energy and species; diffusive momentum, heat and mass transfer; dimensionless equations and numbers; laminar boundary layers; drag, heat transfer and mass transfer coefficients; transport analogies; simultaneous heat and mass transfer; as well as evaporative cooling, droplet evaporation and diffusion flames.

MIE561H - Healthcare Systems
MIE 561 is a “capstone” course. Its purpose is to give students an opportunity to integrate the Industrial Engineering tools learned in previous courses by applying them to real world problems. While the specific focus of the case studies used to illustrate the application of Industrial Engineering will be the Canadian health care system, the approach to problem solving adopted in this course will be applicable to any setting. This course will provide a framework for identifying and resolving problems in a complex, unstructured decision-making environment. It will give students the opportunity to apply a problem identification framework through real world case studies. The case studies will involve people from the health care industry bringing current practical problems to the class. Students work in small groups preparing a feasibility study discussing potential approaches. Although the course is directed at Industrial Engineering fourth year and graduate students, it does not assume specific previous knowledge, and the course is open to students in other disciplines.

MIE562H - Scheduling
This course takes a practical approach to scheduling problems and solution techniques, motivating the different mathematical definitions of scheduling with real world scheduling systems and problems. Topics covered include: job shop scheduling, timetabling, project scheduling, and the variety of solution approaches including constraint programming, local search, heuristics, and dispatch rules. Also covered will be information engineering aspects of building scheduling systems for real world problems.

MIE563H - Analytical & Numerical Solution of Engineering PDEs
This course explores analytic and numerical solution techniques for heat/mass diffusion and vibration/wave equations. Emphasis is placed on intuitive derivation of these equations, and analytic solution techniques like separation of variations, eigenfunction expansions, Fourier analysis, integral transforms, coordinate transforms, and special functions. Numerical solutions are introduced via finite difference methods. A key learning outcome of this course is understanding the central role that analytic solutions play in developing intuition about engineering physics, and how this is a fundamental step in learning to verify, validate, and properly use advanced computational modelling tools.

MIE566H - Decision Making Under Uncertainty
Methods of analysis for decision making in the face of uncertainty and opponents. Topics include subjective discrete and continuous probability, utility functions, decision trees, influence diagrams, bayesian networks, multi-attribute utility functions, static and dynamic games with complete and incomplete information, bayesian games. Supporting software.

MIE567H - Dynamic and Distributed Decision Making
Fundamental concepts and mathematical frameworks for scientific sequential decision making in the presence of uncertainty. Utility theory, uncertainty modeling, theory of games, dynamic programming, and multi-agent system. Discussion of how the decision theories can be applied to design algorithms and processes for real-world cases.

MIE1001H - Advanced Dynamics
Variational principles and Lagrange´s Equations, Hamilton´s principle. Kinematics of rigid body motion, Euler angles, rigid body equations of motion. Hamilton´s equations, cyclic coordinates, Legendre transformations. Canonical transformations, Hamilton-Jacobi theory.

MIE1005H - Theory of Vibrations
Multi-degree of freedom systems, using both analytical and approximate methods. Vibrations of continuous systems, including strings, bars and membranes. Natural modes of plate vibration - approximate methods such as Rayleigh’s Energy Methods, Rayleigh-Ritz Method, Galerkin’s Method, and assumed mode method. Introduction to finite element analysis.

MIE1010H - Acoustics and Noise Control
The purpose of the course is to introduce the theory and practical application of acoustics noise and vibration control. While the emphasis of the study will be on the built environment, both indoor and outdoor, the methods taught can also apply to other industries, e.g. the automotive industry. Both the physics and perception of sound will be discussed covering such wide ranging topics as concert hall design, speech intelligibility, HVAC noise control design and building isolation from rail noise, to name a few. The course combines theoretical introductions to the subjects of acoustics, noise and vibration and follows them up with case studies from industry.

MIE1050H - Design of Intelligent Sensor Networks (Formerly MIE1453H: Introduction to Sensors and Sensor Networks)
This course will provide students with practical knowledge on sensor network design including sensor selection, calibration, digitization, and digital signal processing. Students will be introduced to theory and operation of various sensor technologies and their applications. Commonly used transducers such as chemical, mechanical, and magnetic as well as the more advanced organic and nuclear transducers are discussed. This course will also cover linear and non-linear multi-parameter calibration. Digitization, and a survey of digital signal processing techniques will be discussed with practical application of commonly used digital filters. Special focus will be placed on optimal design of sensor networks and multi-sensor data fusion. There will be a design project to enforce the lessons learned in class on sensor calibration and digital signal processing.

MIE1052H - Signal Processing (Formerly MIE1452H: Signal Processing)
Linear systems and signal sampling, Fourier transforms & frequency analysis, Laplace transforms, FFT and inverse FFT algorithms, convolution/de-convolution, impulse response, random signals, noise characterization, auto- and cross-correlation, power spectra, adaptive filters, detection and clustering. These topics will be covered with extensive coverage on their applications to various topics in mechanical or biomedical engineering. In mechanical engineering such topics include vibrations, signal timing, spectral/phase analysis, signature analysis, thermal waves, acoustic emission, engine performance analysis, resonant acoustic spectroscopy (RAS), crack detection and location with ultrasound, flow measurements, condition-based monitoring & maintenance, fracture mechanics, etc. In biomedical engineering these topics include modeling of biomedical control systems, analysis of evoked potentials, analysis of electroencephalograms and electrocardiograms.

MIE1064H - Control Analysis Methods with Applications to Robotics
The main purpose of this course is to introduce a series of distinct topics in control to students who have not seen control system design beyond a first course in control, which includes classical methods such as root locus, and Bode design, for example. The topics discussed in MIE 1064 F are selected to give students a broad overview of a variety of control design methods and concepts in stability.

MIE1070H - Intelligent Robots for Society
This course introduces the design of intelligent robots- focusing on the principles and algorithms needed for robots to function in real world environments with people. Topics that will be covered include autonomy, social and rational intelligence, multi-modal sensing, biologically inspired and anthropomorphic robots, and human-robot interaction. Class discussions will centre on the interactive, personal assistive and service robotics fields.

MIE1075H - AI Applications in Robotics
AI-embedded Robotics: applications in Service and Personal Robots. Development of a prototype home-assistance robot. Applications of the robot in the home environment.

MIE1076H - AI Applications in Robotics II
This course builds on the concepts of AI Applications in Robotics I.

MIE1077H - AI Applications in Robotics III

MIE1080H - Healthcare Robotics
This course provides students with knowledge on healthcare robotics including surgical, assistive, and rehabilitation robots. Specific topics include medical imaging-guided surgery; minimally-invasive surgery through miniaturization, novel actuation and sensing; robotic surgery at tissue and cell levels; autonomous robotic systems to assist with daily living activities; multi-modal robot interfaces; robotics-based rehabilitation technologies; upper limb rehabilitation robots; wearable exoskeletons and sensors; implanted neural interfaces. Students are provided with state-of-the-art advances in healthcare robotics.

MIE1101H - Advanced Classical Thermodynamics
A course in which the postulatory approach is used to develop the theory of thermodynamics. The postulates are stated in terms of a variational principle that allows them to be applied to systems subjected to fields, to phase transitions, and to systems in which surface effects are dominant. The thermodynamic stability of systems is examined and examples of stable, metastable and unstable systems are discussed.

MIE1115H - Heat Transfer with Phase Change
In this course you will learn about the phenomena that control phase change of pure substances. Most of the course will be devoted to studying liquid-vapour phase change, with an emphasis on boiling. We will study the thermodynamics of phase change, vapour bubble nucleation and growth, heat transfer during boiling, and fluid mechanics during the flow of a liquid-vapour mixture. All students are expected to have done undergraduate courses in thermodynamics, fluid mechanics and heat transfer.

MIE1120H - Current Energy Infrastructure and Resources
This course covers the basic principles of how global energy is currently supplied, by primary source. The aim is to provide an energy literacy that can inform research, technology development and effective policy in this area. The course content will be roughly divided according to the current global energy mix (i.e. 31% oil, 27% coal, 25% gas, 6.9% hydro, 4.3% nuclear, 2.5% wind, 1.4% solar, and 1.8% geothermal/biomass/biofuels). In each case background reading and critical analyses will be applied to: (a) the characteristics of the resource; (b) the infrastructure for extraction/development of the resource; (c) the usage of the resulting energy; and (d) the implications of usage. Assignments and exams will assess both background knowledge and the ability to apply fluid flow, thermodynamic and heat transfer analyses to energy supply systems.

MIE1123H - Fundamentals of Combustion
This course will deal with the basic theory of combustion in the steady state, with consideration of theories of flame propagation, flame stabilization, limits of inflammability, ignition, quenching, etc., and discussion will include both laminar and premixed flames, diffusion flames, flames and detonation.

MIE1128H - Materials for Clean Energy Technologies
The primary emphasis of the course is materials properties relevant for some clean energy conversion technologies. More specifically, some materials such as inorganic solids and semi-conductors that play key roles in clean electricity production technologies such as fuel cells, gas turbines, and solar cells will be the primary focus, with their ionic and electronic conduction mechanisms and their relevance being the major part of the technical content of the course. That information will be combined with some overview-level information of a few different technologies on a broad level.

MIE1129H - Nuclear Engineering I
A first course in nuclear reactor theory, which introduces students to the scientific principles of nuclear fission chain reactions and lays a foundation for the application of these principles to the nuclear design and analysis of reactor cores. Topics covered include basic nuclear concepts, atomic fission, neutron propagation and interaction with matter, neutron thermalization, diffusion model of a nuclear reactor, criticality, nuclear reactor kinetics, and reactivity effects. See also: MIE1129H-Syllabus

MIE1130H - Nuclear Engineering II
This course covers the basic principles of the thermo-mechanical design and analysis of nuclear power reactors. Topics include reactor heat generation and removal, nuclear materials, diffusion of heat in fuel elements, thermal and mechanical stresses in fuel and reactor components, singlephase and two-phase fluid mechanics and heat transport in nuclear reactors, and core thermomechanical design.

MIE1132H - Heat Exchanger Design
This course provides the fundamentals and applications for thermal and hydraulic design of heat exchangers. it covers a wide range of relevant topics including the main considerations for equipment selection and design, and different methods of analysis for sizing and rating. More specialized design considerations are also introduced. The objective is for students to become familiar with the design and specifications of industrial heat exchangers by solving practical problems using synthesis of other engineering subjects such as thermodynamics, heat transfer, and fluid mechanics.

MIE1199H - Special Topics in Thermal Sciences
This course is a means of offering specialty courses in the field of Thermal Sciences, exploring topics that would otherwise not be made available in the core graduate curriculum. The topic of this course will change each time that the course is delivered. The primary means of delivery will be lectures, although the instructor will have the freedom to supplement course delivery as appropriate. See also: MIE1199H-Syllabus

MIE1201H - Advanced Fluid Mechanics I
This fundamental course develops the conservation laws governing the motion of a continuum and applies the results to the case of Newtonian fluids, which leads to the Navier-Stokes equations. From these general equations, some theorems are derived from specific circumstances such as incompressible fluids or inviscid fluids. Basic solutions to, and properties of, the governing equations are explored for the case of viscous, but incompressible, fluids. Topics included involve exact solutions, low-Reynolds-number flows, laminar boundary layers, flow kinematics, and 2D potential flows.

MIE1207H - Structure of Turbulent Flows
This is a first level course in turbulent flows following an exposure to basic undergraduate fluid mechanics. It deals with the governing equations of motion, statistical representation of the turbulent field and describes fundamental shear flows such as jets, wakes and boundary layers. Emphasis is placed on the physical aspects of the motion.

MIE1208H - Microfluidic Biosensors
This course will present the fundamentals and applications of biosensors realized on microfluidic platforms. Topics to be covered include: Microfabrication techniques for constructing silicon, glass, and polymer devices; Microfluidic principles; Biosensing mechanisms; Design and analysis of microfluidic biosensors; Microfluidic immunosensors; Microfluidic nucleic acid sensors; Microfluidic chemical sensors; Other applications of microfluidic biosensors

MIE1210H - Computational Fluid Mechanics and Heat Transfer
This is an introductory course that will teach a Finite Volume (FV) and Finite Difference (FD) approaches to Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) and Heat Transfer. Since the advent of commercially available computers, CFD has been an important engineering research domain as it gave researchers the ability to solve analytically intractable problems of industrial relevance. In the last two decades, the immense demand for CFD research and expertise has spawned the commercialization of software packages such as Fluent/CFX and FEMlab. Despite these readily available software packages, there is a recognized importance to user expertise, fundamental knowledge, and critical understanding of their inner workings. In addition, home spun research codes are still prominent in academia and industry. This is due in large part to the fact that commercial software packages are geared toward a broad range of research topics, and may not function as efficiently as a code designed with a specific problem in mind, and to the fact that developments in CFD are typically achieved in research before they are adopted by software companies. This course is appropriate both for students who wish to become knowledgeable users of commercial CFD programs, and students who plan to create, develop, or enhance research codes. Therefore, the overreaching goals of this course are threefold: 1. To give you an introduction to fundamental discretization and solution techniques for heat transfer and fluid dynamics problems; 2. To give you an understanding of solution methodologies, advantages, downfalls, considerations (stability, accuracy, efficiency), and the inner workings of CFD software; and 3. To have you gain experience writing programs and solving 1D and 2D problems, and in using these programs to demonstrate and reinforce 1 and 2.

MIE1212H - Convective Heat Transfer
The basic partial differential equations of material transport by fluid flow is derived along with the most significant analytical solutions of these equations, e.g., fully developed laminar flow and heat transfer in pipes and channels. Prediction of heat and mass transfer rates based on analytical and numerical solutions of the governing partial differential equations. Heat transfer in fully developed pipe and channel flow, laminar boundary layers, and turbulent boundary layers. Approximate models for turbulent flows. General introduction to heat transfer in complex flows. Discussion will be centered on boundary conditions for heat transfer, similarity and dimensionless parameters, and boundary layer approximations.

MIE1222H - Multiphase Flows
The purpose of this course is tor provide a basic understanding of multiphase flows. In particular, the dynamics of drops and bubbles in various flow conditions will be presented. The course will introduce the important parameters involved in analyzing multiphase flows. The equation of mass, momentum, and energy for such systems will be presented. These equations will be solved for specific conditions. Also, the methodology for solving more complex multiphase flow problems will be described.

MIE1232H - Microfluidics and Laboratory-on-a-Chip Systems
Tremendous opportunities are associated with shrinking large-scale (laboratory) processes to characteristic volumes of 10nL-100µL and translating them to continuous-flow formats. Applications of microfluidic and lab-on-a-chip technologies include assays for biomolecular detection, platforms for the perfusion culture of cells, organs and organisms, microfluidic bioprinting, and miniature chemical factories and energy conversion. The interdisciplinary course considers the different backgrounds of students and consists of a combination of lectures and project work. Projects will consist of individual and group contributions and involve the design, manufacture, testing and live demonstration a microfluidic device. Course participants will receive hands-on experience in several current technologies for the processes for the manufacture of microfluidic devices (soft lithography, hot embossing, 3D printing).

MIE1240H - Wind Power
This course is designed to provide students with a comprehensive view of the fundamental concepts of wind power projects, from inception and economic viability to implementation and operation. Students will learn an appreciation for the main components of wind power systems. In addition, this course will cover the identification and quantification of the wind resource, numerical modelling and CFD techniques applied to wind power systems, wind turbine aerodynamics, design and performance, wind turbine noise, wind farm design and economic and environmental evaluation of wind projects. A final project will be undertaken involving specific technology developments in the wind industry and its potential impact on existing facilities.

MIE1241H - Energy Management
The main goal of this course is to introduce the concepts and techniques for energy management and utilization. Among the subjects to be discussed will be: energy supply and distribution, energy audits, energy efficiency in the industrial environment, mechanical and electrical applications, energy conservation, and an introduction to energy storage strategies. Practical applications include mining, manufacturing, construction (LEED, HVAC, lightning, etc.), power and process plants, oil and gas and food processing. The fundamental principles of thermodynamics, fluid mechanics and heat transfer will be used for analyzing these energy systems.

MIE1242H - Applied Thermal Management
Applications in EVs, Electronic Systems, and Datacenters

MIE1299H - Special Topics in Fluid Mechanics
This course will teach students how to apply fundamental fluid mechanics to the study of biological systems. The course is divided into three modules, with the focus of the first two modules on the human circulatory and respiratory systems, respectively. Topics covered will include blood rheology, blood flow in the heart, arteries, veins and microcirculation, the mechanical properties of the heart as a pump; air flow in the lungs and airways, mass transfer across the walls of these systems, the fluid mechanics of the liquid-air interface of the alveoli, and artificial mechanical systems and devices for clinical aid. The third and final module will cover a range of other fluid problems in modern biology.

MIE1301H - Solid Mechanics
Review of tensor notation; analysis of stress in a continuum including principal stress, invariants, spherical and deviator tensors; analysis of deformation and strain in a continuum including Lagrangian and Eulerian descriptions, spherical and deviator tensors, strain rate tensors and compatibility equations; equilibrium equations; constitutive relations for general linear solid, application to elastic, plastic and viscoelastic solids; anisotropic elasticity, orthotropic materials.

MIE1303H - Fracture Mechanics
This course offers graduate students an in-depth study of fracture mechanics as applied to real engineering problems. The course is divided into three main components: failure analysis using fracture mechanics concepts, diagnostics using replicas of engineering failures, and failure prevention techniques. Mofdes of failure, brittle fracture, linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM), elastoplastic fracture mechanics (EPFM) and fatigue crack initiation and growth will constitute the failure analysis component. In-laboratory examinations of typical fractures will constitute the diagnostics component. Design considerations, Surface treatment and different processing techniques for crack arrest will conclude the final component. The course is supported by numerous aerospace case studies.

MIE1359H - Engineering Cell Biology and Micro/Nanoengineered Platforms
Motivation/Objectives: A cell is the basic unit of life in all organisms. Understanding cellular structures and how cells function is fundamental to all aspects of biosciences and is the basis for disease diagnostics/therapeutics and drug discovery. For single cell studies, the development of enabling micro and nanoengineered techniques/systems is a highly active field. The objectives of this course are two folds: (1) The course targets engineering graduate students to introduce essential topics in cell biology. (2) The course will also discuss micro/nano fabricated/engineered techniques/systems for manipulating cells, stimulating cells, and quantitatively measuring cellular activities.

MIE1401H - Human Factors Engineering
Learn the basic concepts of human factors engineering. Learn the importance of considering human capabilities and limitations in the design of systems. Develop skills to apply human factors principles to the analysis, design, and evaluation of systems.

MIE1402H - Experimental Methods in Human Factors Research
The course deals with practical problems associated with the design of experiments in Human Factors research, with an emphasis on the use of statistical packages and data analysis tools. Topics covered will include analysis of variance, non- parametric statistics, balanced and unbalanced block designs (including Latin squares), confidence intervals, etc. Stress is given to practical problems and the intuitive understanding of applied statistics.

MIE1403H - Analytical Methods in Human Factors Research
The course covers a variety of topics in Human Factors / Ergonomics research related to the acquiring, analysing, and modelling of human behavioural data. Topics to be covered include the following (in approximate order of presentation): Selecting Measures for Human Factors Research; Psychophysical methods of measurement: - Classical psychophysical methods - Signal Detection Theory - Indirect and direct subjective scaling; Protocol Analysis - Interviewing and Questionnaires - Knowledge Elicitation; Estimating mental workload & situational awareness; Manual Control - Tracking paradigms - Modelling of human manual control performance

MIE1411H - Design of Work Places
Introduction to ergonomics in industrial settings. Biomechanics related to manual materials handling, repetitive strain injuries, visual and auditory limitations, human information processing and short term memory limitations, psychomotor skill, anthropometry and workspace layout, population stereotypes, design of controls and displays, circadian rhythms and design of shift work schedules.

MIE1412H - Human-Automation Interaction
A survey of theoretical and applied issues in human interaction with automation. Topics included are: philosophy of human-machine systems, types and levels of automation, models of human-automation interaction, function allocation, mode error, bias, trust, workload and situation awareness, automation interfaces, decision-aiding, adaptable and adaptive (intelligent) automation, supervisory control, and management of human-automation systems.

MIE1413H - Statistical Models in Empirical Research
This course covers various statistical models used in empirical research, in particular human factors research, including linear regression, mixed linear models, non-parametric models, generalized linear models, time series modeling, and cluster analysis. For various observational and experimental data, students will be proficient in generating relevant hypotheses to answer research questions, selecting and building appropriate statistical models, and effectively communicating these results through interpretation and presentation of results. Basic knowledge in probability, statistics, and experimental design is required. The course will not focus on the design of experiments. In addition to homework assignments and exams, the students will review and critique journal articles and conference papers for the validity of the use of various statistical models. The students will work on a term long project of their choice and will be encouraged to relate this assignment to their current research projects. The examples used in class and the assignments will be drawn from human factors research. However, the students will not be required to use human factors data for their project.

MIE1414H - Human Factors in Transportation
The course will cover a wide range of human factors topics related to road transportation, in particular motor vehicle safety. The course provides an understanding of road user characteristics and limitations and how these affect design of traffic control devices and the roadway. The course topics include: history and scope of human factors in transportation; vision and information processing in the context of driving; driver adaptation; driver education, driver licensing and regulation; traffic control devices; crash types, causes, and countermeasures; alcohol, drug, and fatigue effects; forensic human factors.

MIE1415H - Analysis and Design of Cognitive Work
Frameworks, tools and methods to analyze and design support for cognitive work. The course will emphasize computer-based work in complex production- and/or safety-critical systems. Primary frameworks include Cognitive Work Analysis and Ecological Interface Design, with consideration of complementary perspectives in Cognitive Systems Engineering. The design element will emphasize the human-machine interface.

MIE1416H - Human Factors in Healthcare
This course provides an introduction to the application of human factors (HF) in the analysis of healthcare systems using case studies and current events. Various healthcare models are explored with a focus on aims of healthcare systems in Canada and the US. Applicable HF theory, models, principles and methods are covered. Emphasis is placed on the use of HF in prospective and retrospective system safety evaluation and integration of technology (including ML/AI) in clinical environments. Equity as a cross-cutting dimension of quality care, engagement of patients in system redesign processes, and research ethics and misconduct are also covered.

MIE1444H - Engineering for Psychologists
The objective of the course is to convey engineering thinking to non engineers, and specifically psychology graduate students, to support the Collaborative Specialization in Psychology and Engineering (PsychEng). The aim is for psychology students to be able to understand engineering language and common methods to be able to participate in design activities.
The course will introduce the problem-solving focus of engineering work, including the use of: engineering assumptions, models (formation, interpretation, limits), codes / standards and heuristics, problem statements, design objectives and functions, and processes for selecting design alternatives.
Considerable attention in the course is devoted to existing applications of psychology in engineering, e.g., in design theory and methodology and human factors, etc. The problem-solving perspective of engineering enables clarification of not just where psychological theories are applicable, but may also inform where such theories may require further development. For example, applying social psychological theories and models, e.g., Higgins’ Regulatory Focus Theory, to solve engineering problems can be quite challenging, and may add at least a physical dimension to such models.
Projects in human factors, design methodology, and other areas of engineering that can benefit from application of psychology are offered to be completed as course projects. Finally, Psychologists are also guided on how to present their work to engineering audiences.

MIE1499H - Special Topics in Human Factors and Ergonomics
Field research is a process where data is collected through qualitative methods. The objective of field study is to observe and interpret a subject of study in its natural environment. Field research employs qualitative methods, including interviews, direct observation, focus groups and artifact analyses. In human factors, field work is used in a variety of ways to identify errors in systems, understand human needs, and to evaluate designs. In this course students will learn core qualitative methodologies, philosophies and their application to human factors contexts and problems. Learners will critique qualitative methodologies and have an opportunity to practice techniques through the design of a field research study.

MIE1501H - Knowledge Modelling and Management
Information Engineering focuses on the representation and use of information in the context of the web. The first part of the course covers the Semantic Web, including XML, RDF, Linked Data, Provenance, Trust and Data Mashup. The second part covers web-based Knowledge Representations, including: Description Logic, OWL, SWRL, and Ontologies.

MIE1505H - Enterprise Modelling
To remain competitive, enterprises must become increasingly agile and integrated across their functions. Enterprise models play a critical role in this integration, enabling improved designs for enterprises, analysis of their performance, and management of their operations. This course motivates the need for enterprise models and introduces the concepts of generic and deductive enterprise models. It reviews research to date on enterprise modelling, including emerging standards and implementation technologies.

MIE1510H - Formal Techniques in Ontology Engineering
This course will explore theoretical techniques for the design and analysis of formal ontologies. Topics will include the design of verified ontologies, methodologies for proving properties about ontologies, and applications of classification theorems from mathematics. These techniques will be applied to ontologies that are currently being used in government and industry.

MIE1512H - Data Analytics
This course is a research seminar that focuses on recent developments in the area of Data Management for Analytics. Science, businesses, society, and government are been revolutionized by data-driven methods that benefit heavily from scalable data management techniques. The course provides an overview of data management concepts applied to analytics, covering methods and techniques, including distributed computations on massive datasets and frameworks for enabling large-scale parallel data processing on clusters of commodity servers. Emphasis is given to data management techniques for analyzing Web Data and Open Datasets. The course evaluation is based on student presentations, a focused bibliography survey, a hands on invigilated lab, and a course project (the last two using computational notebooks on scalable platforms). The project goal is to reproduce high quality published research in the area of data analytics, emphasizing data management aspects.

MIE1513H - Decision Support Systems
This course provides students with an understanding of the role of a decision support system in an organization, its components, and the theories and techniques used to construct them. The course will focus on information analysis to support organizational decision-making needs and will cover topics including information retrieval, descriptive and predictive modeling using machine learning and data mining, recommendation systems, and effective visualization and communication of analytical results.

MIE1514H - Systems Design and Engineering: A Product Perspective
The course objective is to familiarize students with the principles and methods of systems engineering in the design of products. It includes specific practical examples and projects to aid in understanding and appreciating fundamental principles. Students will apply the various systems engineering methods and techniques as appropriate across all phases of a product’s life cycle. The course will prepare students who are or will be involved in high technology complex systems, and the preliminary and detailed design of products.

MIE1516H - Structured Learning and Inference
This Research Course will provide students with the conceptual, theoretical, and implementational foundations of fundamental tools for structured learning and inference: probabilistic graphical models, probabilistic programming, and deep neural networks. The course will focus on the design and training of structured models for specific application use cases such as answering probabilistic queries over data, sequence tagging and classification, and image recognition through programming intensive projects including a final independently proposed research project with report component.

MIE1517H - Introduction to Deep Learning

MIE1520H - Learning with Graphs and Sequences
Complex data in a variety of applications can often lend themselves to a sequence or graph representation. In recent years, many tools and techniques were developed to efficiently learn from sequence and graph data. In particular, specialized deep neural network architectures, such as graph neural networks and transformers, have obtained state-of-the-art performance in tasks such as natural language processing and recommender systems. This course will provide students with advanced conceptual, theoretical, and implementational skills for developing machine learning approaches for processing sequences and graphs. The course will cover the design and training of both fundamental models and recent state-of-the-art models, and will prepare students to conduct research that involves the development or application of machine learning techniques for sequences or graph data. Knowledge of machine learning, algorithms, and programming is required, while knowledge of deep learning is recommended. The course is a research-oriented course. Students are expected to read and present research papers and the main evaluation will be an individual research project.

MIE1603H - Integer Programming (for Research students)
Formulation of integer programming problems and the characterization of optimization problems representable as integer and mixed-integer programs. The degree of difficulty of classes of integer programs and its relation to the structure of their feasible sets. Optimality conditions. Branchand-bound, cutting plane, and decomposition methods for obtaining solutions or approximating solutions.

MIE1605H - Stochastic Processes
This course is an introduction to stochastic processes with an emphasis on applications to queueing theory and service Engineering

MIE1607H - Stochastic Modeling and Optimization
A course in renewal theory, Markov renewal theory, regenerative and semi-regenerative processes, Markov and semi-Markov processes and decision processes with emphasis on applications in production/inventory control, maintenance, communication systems, flexible manufacturing systems.

MIE1612H - Stochastic Programming and Robust Optimization
Official course description: Stochastic programming and robust optimization are optimization tools dealing with a class of models and algorithms in which data is affected by uncertainty, i.e., some of the input data are not perfectly known at the time the decisions are made. Topics include modeling uncertainty in optimization problems, two-stage and multistage stochastic programs with recourse, chance constrained programs, computational solution methods, approximation and sampling methods, and applications. Knowledge of linear programming, probability and statistics are required, while programming ability and knowledge of integer programming are helpful.

MIE1613H - Stochastic Simulation
This course is an introduction to modelling and analysis of stochastic dynamical systems using computer simulation. The course will provide a rigorous yet accessible treatment of the probability foundations of simulation, and discuss programming simulation models in a lower-level language (e.g., Python). Design and analysis of simulation experiments will also be covered. Applications in service and financial engineering will be emphasized.

MIE1615H - Markov Decision Processes
This is a course to introduce the students to theories of Markov decision processes. Emphasis will be on the rigorous mathematical treatment of the theory of Markov decision processes. Topics will include MDP finite horizon, MDP with infinite horizon, and some of the recent development of solution method.

MIE1616H - Research Topics in Healthcare Engineering
This is a seminar-based course in which we will review a variety of papers in the field of healthcare OR. We will survey and evaluate several papers within topic areas and try to identify areas for potential future research. Some papers will be distinctly OR, while others will come from researchers in the field of health policy and health economics. One thing that you will notice as we go through the literature is that the area of healthcare engineering is interdisciplinary in nature and encourages solutions that are derived from various areas of expertise. This interdisciplinary approach is also encouraged through the many funding bodies that currently support healthcare engineering research in North America. The Canadian Institute of Health Research, CIHR, (http://www.cihr-irsc.gc.ca) funds the majority of healthcare research in Canada. It is composed of 14 virtual ‘institutes’ that represent all facets of health research. The Institute of Health Services and Policy Research, IHSPR, is most related to the type of collaborative research discussed above. It supports innovative research, capacity-building and knowledge translation in order to improve health care service delivery. In 2001 and 2004, IHSPR was involved with national consultations on health services priorities entitled “Listening for Direction”. The result of these consultations was a set of priorities for Canadian researchers in the area of health care policy and management. Of course, not all of the topics are relevant to Healthcare Engineering, but many of the readings and articles discussed in this class will align with the most recent set of priorities:

MIE1619H - Constraint Programming and Hybrid Optimization
The topic of MIE1619 is the “non-traditional” optimization technique Constraint Programming (CP) and hybrids of CP with approaches in OR. Heavy emphasis will be placed on similarities and differences between CP and mathematical programming including the unified framework of search, relaxation, and inference. The primary hybrid approaches will be based on constraint generation approaches including Logic-based Benders Decomposition and SAT Modulo Theory. This is an advanced graduate level course intended for research-stream students. MEng students are not admitted without special permission from the instructor. The course will be challenging. Students are expected to read material in preparation for each lecture and, in a few cases, view online lectures. An objective of this course is to impart skills necessary for an academic career such as paper writing, presentation skills, and writing peer reviews. The main evaluation will be a project where the student is expected to apply techniques discussed in the course to their own research interests: you should do something you weren’t already planning to do as part of your research. A goal of this course is that these projects will be publishable in a peer-reviewed forum.

MIE1620H - Linear Programming and Network Flows
Rigorous introduction to the theory of linear programming. Simplex method, revised simplex method, duality, dual simplex method. Post-optimality analysis. Interior point methods. Decomposition methods. Network flow algorithms. Maximum flow, shortest path, assignment, min cost flow problems.

MIE1621H - Non-Linear Optimization
Theory and computational methods of non-linear optimization. Convex sets, convex and concave functions. Unconstrained and Constrained Optimization. Quadratic Programming. Optimality conditions and convergence results. Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions. Introduction to penalty and barrier methods. Duality in nonlinear programming.

MIE1622H - Computational Finance and Risk Management
The objective of the course is to examine the construction of computational algorithms in solving financial problems, such as risk-aware decision-making, asset pricing, portfolio optimization and hedging. Considerable attention is devoted to the application of computational and programming techniques to financial, investment and risk management problems. Materials in this course are quantitative and computational in nature as well as analytical. Topics include mean-variance portfolio optimization, simulation (Monte Carlo) methods, scenario-based risk optimization, hedging, uncertainty modeling, asset pricing, simulating stochastic processes, and numerical solutions of differential equations. Python is the primary computational and modeling software used in this course, we also briefly describe other programming environments such as R, Matlab and C/C++ used in financial engineering. Practical aspects of financial and risk modeling, which are used by industry practitioners, are emphasized.

MIE1623H - Introduction to Healthcare Engineering
This course illustrates the use of industrial engineering techniques in the field of healthcare. Common strategic, tactical, and operational decision-making problems arising in healthcare will be approached from an operations research perspective. Unique aspects of healthcare compared to other industries will be discussed. Real-world datasets will be provided to illustrate the complexity of applying standard operations research methods to healthcare.

MIE1624H - Introduction to Data Science and Analytics
The objective of the course is to learn analytical models and overview quantitative algorithms for solving engineering and business problems. Data science or analytics is the process of deriving insights from data in order to make optimal decisions. It allows hundreds of companies and governments to save lives, increase profits and minimize resource usage. Considerable attention in the course is devoted to applications of computational and modeling algorithms to finance, risk management, marketing, health care, smart city projects, crime prevention, predictive maintenance, web and social media analytics, personal analytics, etc. We will show how various data science and analytics techniques such as basic statistics, regressions, uncertainty modeling, simulation and optimization modeling, data mining and machine learning, text analytics, artificial intelligence and visualizations can be implemented and applied using Python. Python and IBM Watson Analytics are modeling and visualization software used in this course. Practical aspects of computational models and case studies in Interactive Python are emphasized.

MIE1624H - Introduction to Data Science and Analytics
The objective of the course is to learn analytical models and overview quantitative algorithms for solving engineering and business problems. Data science or analytics is the process of deriving insights from data in order to make optimal decisions. It allows hundreds of companies and governments to save lives, increase profits and minimize resource usage. Considerable attention in the course is devoted to applications of computational and modeling algorithms to finance, risk management, marketing, health care, smart city projects, crime prevention, predictive maintenance, web and social media analytics, personal analytics, etc. We will show how various data science and analytics techniques such as basic statistics, regressions, uncertainty modeling, simulation and optimization modeling, data mining and machine learning, text analytics, artificial intelligence and visualizations can be implemented and applied using Python. Python and IBM Watson Analytics are modeling and visualization software used in this course. Practical aspects of computational models and case studies in Interactive Python are emphasized.

MIE1626H - Data Science Methods and Statistical Learning
This course will equip the students with the fundamental skills and knowledge for: understanding the statistical foundation of data science and machine learning methods; approaching active and passive data as artifacts for scientific evaluation; combining, pre-processing, and cleaning data in practical data science projects; performing exploratory data analysis and uncovering patterns in data; analyzing data and making inference using methods from statistical learning; resampling data and evaluate the error of any computational estimate; using confidence intervals, analysis of variance, and hypothesis testing to explain data; implementing linear and nonlinear regression models for prediction and inference; designing and understanding tree-based models and support vector machines; detecting and avoiding misleading statistical figures, information visualization, and other forms of data presentation which lack a logical coherence. This is an intensive and high-demand course which requires active engagement and participation.

MIE1628H - Cloud-Based Data Analytics (formerly Big Data Science)
This course covers Big Data fundamentals including an overview of Hadoop MapReduce and Spark. Covers Cloud fundamentals and Big Data Analytics on Cloud-based platforms including an introduction to a specific Cloud platform such as Microsoft Azure, Amazon Web Services, or Google Cloud Platform along with common practices for this platform. Covers Cloud technologies to store and process structured, unstructured and semi-structured data. Covers Cloud-based implementation of Real-time Analytics and Machine Learning.

MIE1653H - Integer Programming Applications (for M.Eng. students)
Formulation of integer programming problems and the characterization of optimization problems representable as integer and mixed-integer programs. The degree of difficulty of classes of integer programs and its relation to the structure of their feasible sets. Optimality conditions. Branchand-bound, cutting plane, and decomposition methods for obtaining solutions or approximating solutions.

MIE1666H - Machine Learning for Mathematical Optimization

MIE1699H - Special Topics in Operations Research
This course will provide an introduction to System Dynamics (SD) modelling.

MIE1705H - Thermoplastics Polymer Processing
This course is designed to provide the background for an understanding of the wide field of polymer processing, and provide a strong foundation including fundamentals and applications of polymer processing. Topics include: fundamentals of polymers, extrusion, injection molding, die forming, mixing, and other common plastics processes such as fiber spinning, blow molding, rotational molding, coating, etc.

MIE1706H - Manufacturing of Cellular and Microcellular Polymers
Manufacturing and design issues in foamed materials processing. Solution and diffusion of gas in polymers. Sorption experiments for determining the solubility and diffusivity. Plasticizing effect of gas in a polymer. Bubble nucleation theories. Processing strategies for the production of high nucleation density foams. Mathematical model of bubble growth. Processing strategies for the bubble growth control. Effect of melt strength on bubble coalescence. Continuous processing of microcellular foamed polymers.

MIE1707H - Structure-Property Relationships of Thermoplastic and Composite Foams
This course provides the structure to property relationships of thermoplastic and composite foams. The crystal morphology (crystallinity, crystal size, crystal kind, crystal number, etc.), the cellular morphology (cell density, cell size, void fraction, uniformity, open cell content, etc.), and the composite structures (the fiber/platelet kind, the fiber/platelet aspect ratio, fiber/platelet orientation, the interface of fiber/platelet and matrix, etc.) affect various properties of the final products such as the thermal conductivity, the electrical conductivity, the mechanical properties, of various thermoplastic and composite foams. The mechanical properties (tensile properties, flexural properties, impact strength, etc.), the thermal conductivity (polymer conduction, gas conduction and radiation), and the electric conductivity are described as a function of the aforementioned structural parameters. The effects of the nano particles (carbon nanotube (CNT), graphene nano platelets (GNP), nanofibrils, etc.) on the properties are also discussed. Nanofibril compositess and their processing, structure characterization and property testing are also intensely discussed.

MIE1708H - Collision Reconstruction
This course provides the participant with a comprehensive understanding of widely-accepted techniques of vehicular collision reconstruction based on physical and engineering principles. The course covers Energy, Impulse and Momentum fundamentals and how they are engaged to obtain valuable information from collisions, in order to answer important questions about culpability in various litigation arenas. Content is reinforced with real-world examples. A wide variety of collision types (passenger vehicle, motorcycle, cyclist, pedestrian, heavy truck) and modes (high speed, low speed, rollover, tire failure) are addressed in the context of various contributors to collisions, whether they be from the operator, vehicle, or the roadway environment. Specialized techniques for evaluation of the use, performance, and effectiveness of restraint systems, and the avoidability of collisions are also covered. The latest technologies for harvesting data from ‘black boxes’ are covered, and state of the art computer simulation techniques are incorporated into the teachings.

MIE1709H - Continuum Mechanics
Continuum Mechanics is the study of the response of the matter on a macroscopic scale to different loading conditions, neglecting the structure of the matter on the smaller scale (i.e., molecular scale). It brings out the general principles common to all media and discusses the assumptions for developing constitutive equations of idealized materials (e.g., solid and fluid). The developed fundamentals can be applied to engineering problems such as elasticity, viscoelasticity, plasticity, linearly viscous fluid, etc.

MIE1714H - Failure Analysis
Engineering is the science of predictive modelling based on application of Physical Laws, and prototyping to verify designs. This applies to all fields. Good Engineering prevents Failure. The course centers on the Theory of Failure Analysis and how it directs engineering activity: design, research, quality systems, continuous improvement, innovation, new knowledge creation, systemic failure, and business management.

MIE1715H - Life Cycle Engineering
This course introduces the fundamentals of both product and process engineering with an emphasis on life cycle models. A mixture of practical and theoretical topics, methodologies, principles, and techniques are covered such as Life Cycle Analysis, Design For Assembly (DFA), Design For Manufacturing (DFM), Design For Environment (DFE), etc. Students develop an understanding of the performance, cost, quality and environment implications of both product design and manufacture and become capable of translating these into engineering “cradle-tograve” responsibility requirements, goals, and specifications in order to maximize the values of products and the effectiveness of supply chain management while containing the costs to manufacturer, the user, and the society.

MIE1718H - Computer Integrated Manufacturing
The course will focus on the integration of facilities (machine tools, robotics) and the automation protocols required in the implementation of computer integrated manufacturing. Specific concepts addressed include flexible manufacturing systems (FMS); interfaces between computer aided design and computer aided manufacturing systems.

MIE1720H - Creativity in Conceptual Design
This course will present established methods that aim to enhance creativity during conceptual design, along with more recent research relevant to creativity and conceptual design. Students will select current creativity research from multiple disciplines, identify limitations of reported results, determine and perform further research that can be conducted within a course, and report results.

MIE1721H - Reliability
The goal of the course is to introduce students to principles of reliability from a practical point of view. The course covers principles of quality, principles of reliability, reliability of systems, failure rate data and models, quality and reliability in design and manufacturing, and reliability and availability in maintenance including cost models. Some other topics could be covered, depending on timing. A moderate knowledge of probability and statistics is a requirement.

MIE1723H - Engineering Asset Management
This course is concerned with the determination of optimal maintenance and replacement practices for components and capital equipment. The lectures will be supplemented by case study assignments including short-term deterministic replacement; short-term probabilistic replacement; use of OREST, PERDEC, AGE/CON, EXAKT and SMS software for the optimization of physical asset management decisions. Professor Taghipour will cover the topic: Role of Emerging Technologies in Physical Asset Management along with a brief introduction to inspection optimization of assets with hidden failures or soft failures, sustainable asset management along with the application of sustainable asset management for utilization, purchase, and disposal of a fleet of assets.

MIE1724H - Additive Manufacturing in Engineering Applications
The aim of this course is to help students understand the concepts of AM and their role in design and fabrication of complex structures. Also, the course will introduce state-of-the-art approaches to “3D printing”, which is the more common term to the more professionally utilized “Additive Manufacturing” (AM) term. Students will be able to follow a design paradigm through careful analysis of complex structures and complete an AM process flow through CAD conceptualization, conversion to STL files, transfer to AM machine, machine conditioning, removal/clean up and post-processing. Also, design for AM (DfAM) is introduced to optimize product fabrication, controlled by part orientation, support design, hollowing out components, constraining features/undercuts, interlock structures and multi-material compatibilities. Case studies will be introduced with AM for investment casting and part fabrication without a conventional CAD file, with focus on medical modeling and reverse engineering data. In recent years, new approaches to AM solutions have produced a large range of controllability and size ranges. Examples of emerging technologies are Multi-Jet Printing (MJP), AM+CNC, two-photon lithography (for nanoscale AM) and Volumetric 3D Printing. Ultimately, students will be able to apply and scale models from the most focused technical perspective to eventual AM fabrication of complex lightweight designs… and never rely on randomized approaches to AM.

MIE1725H - Soft Materials and Machines

MIE1727H - Statistical Methods of Quality Assurance
Awareness of the importance of quality has increased dramatically. Understanding and improving quality is a key factor leading to company’s success and its enhanced competitive position. The course focuses on the following topics in Quality Assurance: Introduction to quality engineering, TQM, costs of quality, quality and productivity, statistical process control, process capability analysis and supplier-producer relations, quality standards and certification, six sigma philosophy and methodology, quality/process improvement using designed experiments, and an overview of acceptance sampling.

MIE1740H - Smart Materials and Structures
Smart materials are a novel class of materials characterized by new and unique properties that can be altered in response to environmental stimuli. They can be used in a wide range of applications since they can exceed the current abilities of traditional materials especially in environments where conditions are constantly changing. This course is designed to provide an integrated and complete knowledge to smart materials and structures, which makes a strong foundation for further studies and research on these materials. Topics include: design, manufacturing, properties of smart materials; Electrical, thermal, magnetic and optical active smart materials systems; Examples are piezoelectrics, ferroelectrics, electrostrictive materials, shape memory materials, magnetostrictive materials; self healing and optical activated materials; Design, and optimization of smart materials based devices and their applications.

MIE1744H - Nanomechanics of Materials
Materials can exhibit dramatically altered mechanical properties and physical mechanisms when they have characteristic dimensions that are confined to small length-scales of typically below ~ 100 nm. These size-scale effects in mechanics result from the enhanced role of surfaces and interfaces, defects and material variations, and quantum effects. Nanostructured materials which exhibit these size-scale effects often have extraordinary mechanical properties as compared to their macroscopic counterparts. This course is designed to provide an introduction to nanomechanics and size-scale mechanical phenomena exhibited by nanostructured materials, and provide a platform for future advanced studies in the areas of computational/experimental nanomechanics and nanostructured materials design and application. Topics include: an introduction to nanomechanics; atomic/molecular structure of materials & nanomaterials synthesis; limitations of continuum mechanics, nanomechanical testing techniques (AFM, nanoindentation, in situ SEM/TEM); atomistic modeling techniques (DFT, MD, Course-grained MD); size-scale strength, plasticity, and fracture ; Hall-Petch strengthening, superplasticity; nanotribology, atomistic origins of friction, nanoscale wear; nano-bio-mechanics; mechanics of nanocomposites.

MIE1745H - Surface Engineering
One materials-related topic that is important for mechanical, civil engineers is the interactions between solids and liquids. Why do some materials absorb water when others do not? How does broccoli remain dry after washing it? How to non-stick pans work? Why is the build plate adhesion of 3D printers so important? What properties of the molten plastics are important for additive manufacturing? This course will discuss how liquids interact with solids, and how these interactions are affected by the chemical, physical, and mechanical properties of the solid, in addition to the viscosity, surface tension, and chemical structure of the liquid. The objective is for students to gain a deep understanding about how liquids and solids interact at interfaces. Examples will be drawn from all fields of engineering and the course is not tilted towards any one discipline in particular.

MIE1804H - Finite Element Analysis in Engineering Design
Starting with the analysis of simple discrete systems, the essential ideas of building up the governing equations of the system from those of its constituent parts is illustrated. The techniques of deriving a discrete set of equations for continuous systems are then outlined; specifically the variational and weighed residual procedures are examined and illustrated through some simple examples. The course then concentrates on applications to structural mechanics of solids. Programming for finite elements is also covered and students are encouraged to design and develop FEM software.

MIE1809H - Advanced Mechatronics
This course provides students with tools to design, model, analyze and control precision mechatronic systems. Specifically, the class provides techniques for the modeling of various system components into a unified approach and tools for the simulation of the performance of these systems. The class also lists techniques and issues that arise when interfacing various components in order to form complex mechatronic systems. The class presents the properties and characteristics of smart material based sensors and actuators with a focus on piezoceramics, its processing and its implementation into various sensors and actuator configurations.

MIE2002H - Readings in Industrial Engineering I
Students may take only one reading course for credit in a degree program, unless special authorization has been granted by the Graduate Studies Committee.

MIE2003H - Readings in Industrial Engineering II
Students may take only one reading course for credit in a degree program, unless special authorization has been granted by the Graduate Studies Committee.

MIE2004H - Readings in Mechanical Engineering I
Students may take only one reading course for credit in a degree program, unless special authorization has been granted by the Graduate Studies Committee.

MIE2005H - Readings in Mechanical Engineering II
Students may take only one reading course for credit in a degree program, unless special authorization has been granted by the Graduate Studies Committee.

AER503H - Aeroelasticity
P R Grant
Lecture Course
Static aeroelastic phenomena are studied, including divergence of slender wings and control reversal. Various methods of solution are considered such as closed form, matrix format iteration and the Rayleigh-Ritz approach. A Study of vibration and flutter of wings and control surfaces is presented with particular emphasis on those parameters which affect flutter speed.

AER1202H - Advanced Flight Dynamics
H H T Liu
Lecture Course
This is a graduate-level course to cover the advanced topic of flight dynamics: its modelling, control and simulation. The purpose is to develop a comprehensive understanding and systematic development of (fixed-wing) aircraft dynamics (vs fundamental understanding and specific treatment at the undergraduate level), through mathematical modelling, control systems design and analysis, as well as dynamic behaviour visualization through computational simulations. Advanced topics of current leading-edge research progress in flight dynamics and control are also introduced.

AER1211H - Human Control Of Flight Systems
P R Grant
Lecture Course
Introductory course. Topics include: mathematical models of man/machine systems, experimental results, examples, linear modelling, stability, nonlinear modelling, optimal control model, control tasks and applications, flight simulation techniques.

AER1216H - Fundamentals of UAVs
H H T Liu
Lecture course
Unpiloted aircraft, known as UAVs, drones or aerial robots, are very quickly becoming a major sector of the aerospace industry. They are increasingly used in aerial photography, inspection of infrastructure, delivery of small packages and other applications requiring inexpensive and flexible flight. The basic physical, scientific and engineering principles necessary to design a remote-controlled fixed-wing or quad-rotor UAV are explained in this course. These include aerodynamics, propulsion, structures and control. A key part of this course will be a group project to create a detailed design of a UAV that is capable of performing a specific function.

AER1217H - Development of Autonomous UAS
H H T Liu
Lecture course
This course is the second part of the CARRE core courses, following AER1216: Fundamentals of UAVs, which covers the fundamental principles related to UAV design: structures, aerodynamics and control. AER1216 is the prerequisite of this course, unless approved by the instructor. In AER 1217, the focus is placed on the development of unmanned aerial systems (UAS), with the theme of autonomy in navigation and control, as well as flight performance analysis and evaluation.
The course curriculum will be delivered in both lectures and development projects, including flight tests. The contents include: quadrotor or fixed-wing UAV dynamics and control; sensing and estimation for UAVs; navigation and path planning; instrumentation and sensor payloads; computer vision. A development project will be given to students who will use the UAV platform to design an autonomous system to accomplish a specific flying mission, to be demonstrated by flight experiments.
Prerequisite: AER1216H - “Fundamentals of UAVs” or equivalent with permission of the instructor

AER510H - Aerospace Propulsion
S Chaudhuri
Lecture Course
Scope and history of jet and rocket propulsion; fundamentals of air-breathing and rocket propulsion; fluid mechanics and thermodynamics of propulsion including boundary layer mechanics and combustion; principles of aircraft jet engines, engine components and performance; principles of rocket propulsion, rocket performance, and chemical rockets; environmental impact of aircraft jet engines.
Prerequisite: AER310H - “Gasdynamics” or equivalent

AER515H - Combustion Process
O Gülder
Lecture Course
Scope and history of combustion, and fossil fuels; thermodynamics and kinetics of combustion including heats of formation and reaction, adiabatic flame temperature, elementary and global reactions, equilibrium calculations of combustion products, and kinetics of pollutant formation mechanisms; propagation of laminar premixed flames and detonations, flammability limits, ignition and quenching; gaseous diffusion flames and droplet burning; introduction to combustion in practical devices such as rockets, gas turbines, reciprocating engines, and furnaces; environmental aspects of combustion.
Pre-requisites: CHE260H1

AER1301H - Kinetic Theory of Gases
C P T Groth
Lecture Course
Introductory discussion of significant length dimensions; different flow regimes, continuum, transition, collision-free; and a brief history of gas kinetic theory. Equilibrium kinetic theory; the article distribution function; Maxell-Boltzmann distribution. Collision dynamics; collision frequency and mean free path. Elementary transport theory, transport coefficients, mean free path method. Boltzmann equation; derivation, Boltzmann H-theorem, collision operators. Generalized transport theory; Maxwell’s equations of change; approximate solution techniques, Chapman -Ensog perturbative and Grad series expansion methods, moment closures; derivation of the Euler and Navier-Stokes equations, higher-order closures. Free molecular aerodynamics. Shock waves.

AER1303H - Advanced Fluid Mechanics
A Ekmekci
Lecture Course
This course is intended to be a first graduate-level course in fluid mechanics, and assumes that students have had at least one introductory fluid mechanics course at the undergraduate level. The course starts with a review of vectors, tensors and related theorems; flow kinematics; derivations of the differential forms of the governing equations of fluid motion. Then the following subjects are covered: exact solutions (solutions with parallel boundaries, solutions with circular symmetry, pulsating flows, stagnation-point flows, etc); special forms of governing equations (Kelvin’s theorem, vorticity transport theorem, equations for inviscid flow (Euler); and boundary layer theory (boundary layer equations, boundary layer on a flat plate: Blasius solution, approximate solutions, effect of pressure gradient, separation, perturbation techniques, stability of boundary layers, etc.

AER1304H - Fundamentals of Combustion
Ö L Gülder
Lecture Course
This course starts with a review of chemical thermodynamics, statistical mechanics, equilibrium chemistry, chemical kinetics, and conservation equations. Then, the following subjects are covered: chemical and dynamic structure of laminar premixed, diffusion, and partially premixed flames; turbulent premixed combustion; turbulent diffusive combustion in one and two-phase flows; aerodynamics and stabilization of flames; ignition, extinction and combustion instabilities; non-intrusive combustion diagnostics and flame spectroscopy.

AER1306H - Special Topics in Reacting Flows
Ö L Gülder
Reading Course
This course provides the students who are intending a career in combustion/reacting flows, fluid mechanics or propulsion an opportunity to do an in-depth study of some of the current academic research areas with implications of practical importance.
It will also be suitable for graduate students who have a good background in essentials of their research area, but need a specialized course to cover material not available in other graduate courses. The intention is not to replace or to overlap with the literature review of the students theses work.
The course will cover 3 to 4 topics from the following:
non-intrusive experimental techniques in isothermal and reacting flows
activation energy asymptotics; high-speed combustion
metal combustion in propulsion
thermo-acoustics in propulsion systems
soot formation and oxidation kinetics
theory of partially-premixed turbulent combustion
synthesis of nano-materials by combustion
high-pressure combustion
Topic selection will depend on the interests of the students taking the course. Similar topics will be added as needed.
Prerequisite: AER1304H - “Fundamentals of Combustion” or equivalent

AER1307H - Fundamentals of Aeroacoustics
P Lavoie
Lecture Course
This course covers the fundamentals of aeracoustics as it applies to general and commercial aviation. The essentials of linear acoustics are presented and related to fluid motion to arrive at fundational theories of aeroacoustics, including Lighthill’s acoustics analogy, the Ffowcs-Williams-Hawkings equation and Goldstein’s equation. The concepts are applied to flows at low Mach numbers, with specific applications sound generation by turbulent flows as well as leading and trailing edge noise. The course will also cover a number of topics related to experimental methods relevant to aeroacoustics. This will include the basics of aeroacoustic test facilities, instrumentation and signal processing. The course is meant for graduate students with strong backgrounds in fluid dynamics but that may lack knowledge of acoustics.

AER1308H - Introduction to Modern Flow Control
P Lavoie
Lecture Course
This course presents the fundamental aspects of modern flow control. The framework of the course will be cast starting with a brief review of the development of flow control from its birth at the turn of the 20th century to current state of the art techniques and methodologies. The key concepts, fundamental to modern flow control, will thus be extracted and categorized throughout the course; including topics such as flow instabilities; dynamic and closed-loop control; actuators and sensors; modeling and simulations.

AER1310H - Turbulence Modelling
C P T Groth
Lecture Course
This course presents an overview of numerical modelling techniques for the prediction of turbulent flows. The emphasis is on the capabilities and limitations of engineering approaches commonly used in computational fluid dynamics (CFD) for the simulation of turbulence. Topics include: Introduction to turbulent flows; definition of turbulence; features of turbulent flows; requirements for and history of turbulence modelling. Conservation equations for turbulent flows; Reynolds and Favre averaging; velocity correlations, Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations (RANS) ; Reynolds stress equations; effects of compressibility. Algebraic models; eddy viscosity and mixing length hypothesis; Cebeci-Smith and Baldwin-Lomax models. Scalar field evolution models; turbulence energy equation; one- and two-equation models; wall functions; low-Reynolds-number effects. Second-order closure models; full Reynolds-stress and algebraic Reynolds stress models. Large-Eddy Simulation (LES) techniques. Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) Methods.

AER1311H - Unsteady Gasdynamics
J J Gottlieb
Lecture Course
The following topics are covered: method of characteristics for solving hyperbolic conversation laws; characteristics of rarefaction, compression and shock waves; reflection, collision, refraction and overtaking of shock waves, expansion waves and contact surfaces; Riemann problem and solution; shock waves interacting with an area enlargement and reduction; shock-tube problem.

AER1312H - High-Temperature Compressible Flows
J J Gottlieb
Lecture Course
Introduction to real-gas effects for unsteady compressible gas flows, including the following topics: concept of real gases (real atoms and molecules); partition functions for translation, rotation, vibration (dissociation), and electrical excitation (ionization); thermal and caloric equations of state; thermodynamic equilibrium; Saha equations for dissociation and ionization; specific heats and sound speeds for dissociating and ionizing gases; normal shock structure in real gases; real-gas flows in unsteady one-dimensional rarefaction waves and steady two-dimensional expansion waves.

AER1315H - Sustainable Aviation
D W Zingg
Lecture Course
This course will cover topics relating to the impact of aircraft on the environment, including noise, local and global emissions, and lifecycle analysis. Students will be exposed to means of quantitative assessment of the impact of aviation noise and emissions as well as metrics for assessing global climate effects. Current and future technologies for mitigating environmental problems will be covered.

AER1316H - Fundamentals of Computational Fluid Dynamics
D W Zingg
Lecture Course
This course presents the fundamentals of numerical methods for inviscid and viscous flows. The following topics are covered: finite-difference and finite-volume approximations, structured and unstructured grids, the semidiscrete approach to the solution of partial differential equations, time-marching methods for ordinary differential equations, stability of linear systems, approximate factorization, flux-vector splitting, boundary conditions, relaxation methods, and multigrid.

AER1318H - Topics in Computational Fluid Dynamics
D W Zingg
Lecture Course
The course first concentrates on the algorithmic details of two specific codes for solving the compressible Navier-Stokes equations, ARC2D and FLOMG . Topics include generalized curvilinear coordinates, approximate factorization, artificial dissipation, boundary conditions, and various convergence acceleration techniques, including multigrid. This is followed by the following topics: flux-difference splitting and high-resolution upwind schemes, including total variation diminishing schemes.
Prerequisite: AER1316H: “Fundamentals of Computational Fluid Dynamics”

AER1319H - Finite Volume Methods for CFD
C P T Groth
Lecture Course
Introduction to upwind finite-volume methods widely used in computational fluids dynamics (CFD) for thehe solution of high-speed inviscid and viscous compressible flows. Topics include: Brief review of conservation equations for compressible flows; Euler equations; Navier-Stokes equations; one- and two-dimensional forms; model equations. Mathematical properties of the Euler equations; primitive and conserved solution variables; eigensystem analysis; compatibility conditions; characteristic variables, Rankine-Hugoniot conditions and Riemann invariants; Riemann problem and exact solution. Godunov’s method; hyperbolic flux evaluation and numerical flux functions; solution monotonicity; Godunov’s theorem. Approximate Riemann solvers; Roe’s method. Higher-order Godunov-type schemes; semi-discrete form; solution reconstruction including least-squares and Green-Gauss methods; slope limiting. Extension to multi-dimensional flows. Elliptic flux evaluation for viscous flows; diamond-path and average-gradient stencils; discrete-maximum principle. High-order methods; essentially non-oscillatory (ENO) schemes.

AER1324H - Introduction to Turbulence
S Chaudhuri
Lecture Course
This course is aimed to provide an overview of the fundamental physical processes in large Reynolds number turbulent flows.
Topics include review of tensors, probabilistic tools, and conservation laws.
Free shear flows: turbulent kinetic energy transport and dissipation.
Scales of turbulent motion: Kolmogorov hypothesis, structure functions, Kármán-Howarth equation, 4/5th law, Fourier modes, Kolmogorov-Obukhov spectrum, intermittency, and refined similarity hypothesis.
Turbulent mixing: scalar transport and dissipation. Alignments of vorticity, scalar gradient, and strain rates. Diagnostics in turbulent flows.

AER501H - Computational Structural Mechanics and Design Optimization
P B Nair
Lecture course
Introduction to the theory of linear elasticity: stress, strain and material constitutive laws. Variational principles and their application: stationary potential energy, stationary complementary potential energy, Reissner’s Principles. The finite element technique: problem formulation; element properties; applications to displacement, vibrations and buckling problems. Introduction to structural optimal design.

AER1403H - Advanced Aerospace Structures
C A Steeves
Lecture course
This course will provide instruction in three areas crucial to aerospace structural design: fiber composite materials, thin walled structures, and finite element methods. All three will be taught in a manner such that their interrelation is made clear. The course will begin with a composite materials, their mechanics and application. General theories of shells and thin walled structures, which are essential to aircraft design, will next be discussed. Finally, finite element methods of use in modelling aircraft structures and composites will be described. No specific background in any of these three topics is required, but a good knowledge of solid and structural mechanics will be assumed.

AER1410H - Topology Optimization
C A Steeves
Lecture course
Topology optimization is a relatively new method for the computational design of structures that enables optimal structural design beyond traditional size and shape optimization. Specifically, topology optimization identifies where to put material and where to put holes within the design domain. This course will examine the background to topology optimization, the theory and algorithms necessary to build a topology optimization code, and the two main approaches to topology optimization. At the conclusion of the course, students will be able to program a basic topology optimization code and use a common commercial software package.

AER1415H - Computational Optimization
P B Nair
Lecture course
This is an introductory graduate-level course on computational optimization and it is assumed that students have had undergraduate level training in multivariable calculus, linear algebra and MATLAB programming. The topics to be covered in this course include: formulation of optimization problems, non-gradient and stochastic search techniques, gradient-based optimization algorithms for unconstrained and constrained problems, numerical methods for sensitivity analysis, surrogate modeling, surrogate-assisted optimization frameworks, applications of optimization algorithms to design, parameter estimation and control.

AER1416H - Numerical Methods for Uncertainty Quantification
P B Nair
Lecture course
This is an introductory graduate-level course on uncertainty quantification and it is assumed that students have had undergraduate level training in statistics, linear algebra and numerical methods for partial differential equations. The topics to be covered include: verification and validation of computational models, construction of probabilistic uncertainty models, Monte Carlo and Quasi-Monte Carlo simulation methods, importance sampling and variance reduction techniques, sparse quadrature schemes, perturbation methods, polynomial chaos expansions, stochastic Galerkin projection schemes, and an introduction to robust design optimization.

AER1418H - Variational Methods for Partial Differential Equations
M Yano
Lecture Course
This course introduces variational formulations and associated finite element methods for partial differential equations in continuum mechanics, including both elliptic and hyperbolic equations. An equal emphasis is placed on mathematical theory and practical implementation. Theoretical topics include discussions of well-posedness, optimality, and a priori and a posteriori error estimates. Practical topics include implementation of finite elements, matrix and vector assembly, adaptive mesh refinement, and Krylov-subspace linear solvers.

ROB501H - Computer Vision for Robotics
J S Kelly
Lecture course
An introduction to aspects of computer vision specifically relevant to robotics applications. Topics include the geometry of image formation, basic image processing operations, camera models and calibration methods, image feature detection and matching, stereo vision, structure from motion and 3D reconstruction. Discussion of moving object identification and tracking as time permits.

AER506H - Spacecraft Dynamics And Control I
M R Emami
Lecture course
Rigid body kinematics and dynamics. Orbital dynamics and control: the two-body problem, orbital perturbations, orbital maneuvers, interplanetary trajectories, the restricted three-body problem. Attitude dynamics and control: torque-free motion, spin stabilization, dual-spin stabilization, disturbance torques, gravity-gradient stabilization, active spacecraft attitude control, bias-momentum stabilization.

ROB521H - Mobile Robotics and Perception
T D Barfoot
Lecture course
The course addresses fundamentals of mobile robotics and sensor-based perception for applications such as space exploration, search and rescue, mining, self-driving cars, unmanned aerial vehicles, autonomous underwater vehicles, etc. Topics include sensors and their principles, state estimation, computer vision, control architectures, localization, mapping, planning, path tracking, and software frameworks. Laboratories will be conducted using both simulations and hardware kits. It is not recommended to take both AER 521 and AER 1514.
Recommended Preparation: AER372H “Control Systems”

AER525H - Robotics
M R Emami
Lecture course
This course extends the fundamentals of analytical robotics to design and control of industrial and aerospace robots and their instrumentation. Topics include forward, inverse, and differential kinematics, screw representation, statics, inverse and forward dynamics, motion and force control of robot manipulators, actuation schemes, task-based and workspace design, position and force sensors, tactile sensing, and vision and image processing in robotic systems. Course instruction benefits from the courseware technology that involves a Java-based on-line simulation and other multimedia means for presenting realistic demonstrations and case studies in the context of teaching advanced notions. A series of experiments in the Robotics Laboratory will also enhance the practical notions of the course content.

AER1503H - Spacecraft Dynamics And Control II
M R Emami
Lecture course
Advanced topics in spacecraft dynamics and control. Course includes a project. Topics include input-output stability analysis and Lyapunov stability analysis with applications to spacecraft attitude control; feedforward, feedback, and adaptive controller design. Quaternion feedback. Linear state-space analysis and observer-based compensator design. Flexible spacecraft dynamics: equations of motion, spatial discretization, modal equations, constrained and unconstrained modes. Flexible spacecraft control: spillover, controller discretization, LQG, H-infinity, and positive real design.
Prerequisite: AER0506H - “Spacecraft Dynamics and Control I”

AER1512H - Multibody Dynamics
G M T D’Eleuterio
Lecture course
This is a seminar course designed to introduce students to the fundamentals of multibody dynamics with particular emphasis on the dynamics of robotic systems. Each student, in consultation with the course coordinator, will be required to select two topics in the area, investigate them thoroughly and present a seminar on each to the other members of the class. Students may choose topics well-treated in the mechanical literature or ones which are more research-oriented, perhaps requiring some original input on the part of the student.

AER1513H - State Estimation for Aerospace Vehicles
T D Barfoot
Lecture course
This course introduces the fundamentals of state estimation for aerospace vehicles. Knowing the state (e.g., position, orientation, velocity) of a vehicle is a basic problem faced by both manned and autonomous systems. State estimation is relevant to aircraft, satellites, rockets, landers, and rovers. This course teaches some of the classic techniques used in estimation including least squares and Kalman filtering. It also examines some cutting edge techniques for nonlinear systems including unscented Kalman filtering and particle filtering. Emphasis is placed on the ability to carry out state estimation for vehicles in three- dimensional space, which is complicated by vehicle attitude and often handled incorrectly. Students will have a chance to work with datasets from real sensors in assignments and will apply the principles of the course to a project of their choosing.

AER1514H - Mobile Robotics
T D Barfoot
Lecture course
This course introduces the basic of controlling mobile robots, with emphasis on techniques for use outdoors. Mobile robots have found application in space exploration (e.g., Mars Exploration Rovers), mining, bomb disposal, search and rescue, and vacuuming our homes. The future will see mobile robotics technology paving the way to such things as home assistants and automated roadways. This course will present the current state of the art in mobile robotics in terms of sensing and algorithms. Concepts will be learned through experimentation with a mobile robotics kit.
Topics include: introduction to mobile robotics, review of probability theory, sensors, computer vision, simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), place recognition, terrain assessment, path planning, path tracking, experimental testing. It is not recommended to take both AER 521 and AER 1514.

AER1515H - Perception for Robotics
S L Waslander
Lecture Course
This course presents the fundamentals of robotic perception based on a foundation of probability, statistics and information theory. Common sensor types and their probabilistic modeling are surveyed, including computer vision, Lidar, radar, GNSS/INS and odometry. Methods for feature extraction, description & matching, direct photometric and point cloud registration, outlier rejection are presented in the context of a robotic localization and mapping front end. Object detection and tracking, semantic segmentation and prior maps are fused to form a complete perceptual view of dynamic environments for a wide range of robotic applications.
Exclusion: ROB 1514

AER1516H - Motion Planning
J S Kelly
Lecture Course
A rigorous mathematical study of the motion planning problem for aerial, ground, and mobile manipulator robot platforms and for multi-robot systems. Geometric representations and the robot configuration space. Sampling-based motion planning. Feedback motion planning in continuous spaces. Planning under sensor uncertainty and with differential constraints.Course project involving the implementation of modern planning algorithms in simulation and (potentially) on a real mobile manipulator.

AER1517H - Control for Robotics
A P Schoellig
Lecture Course
This course presents optimal, adaptive and learning control principles from the perspective of robotics applications. Working from the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman formulation, optimal control methods for aerial and ground robots are developed. Real world challenges such as disturbances, state estimation errors and model errors are addressed and adaptive and reinforcement learning approaches are derived to address these challenges. Course project involves simulated control of an aerial vehicle, with aerodynamic models and wind disturbances.

AER1520H - Microsatellite Design I
R E Zee
Design course
This is the first of a series of two courses, which are intended to provide graduate students with practical space systems engineering experience. Through two consecutive courses, students can participate in a real Canadian Space Agency ‘MicroSat’ mission, gaining a year’s worth of training under some of the leading spacecraft designers in North America.
This two-term apprenticeship allows students to learn and play an active role in spacecraft design, prototyping, assembly, integration, and test. Depending on the stage of the project when students join, they will be exposed to anything from preliminary subsystem design to actual on-orbit operations of a real satellite.
Depending on when the student takes the course, he or she will join a coordinated team involved in spacecraft design, prototyping, assembly, integration or test. Students will be exposed to one or more of the following areas: Systems Engineering; Mission Analysis; Power; Communications; Telemetry/Telecommand; Thermal Control; Structure; Attitude Control; On-Board Computers.
This course is open only to students enrolled in the research program at the Space Flight Laboratory.
Prerequisite: AER 407 “Space Systems Design” or a suitable equivalent

AER1521H - Microsatellite Design II
R E Zee
Design course
The second course permits the student to obtain new and in-depth experience in a particular spacecraft area. In addition, the student is exposed to more elements of the project, considerably increasing the value of the student’s training with time.
This course builds on experience gained in AER 1520, and broadens the student’s understanding of practical spacecraft development. Depending on what the student contributed in AER 1520, the student will take his or her work to the next level of maturity.
Course assignments may include the following tasks: Building of Prototypes; Prototype Testing and/or Test Planning; Detailed Design; Assembly, Integration and Test; Launch preparations; On-orbit commissioning of satellites; Satellite operations.
This course is open only to students enrolled in the research program at the Space Flight Laboratory.
Prerequisite: AER1520H - “Microsatellite Design I

AER1601H - Aerospace Engineering and Operations Management
Instructor: S Armstrong
Lecture course
Aerospace is a broad field of technological activity. The course will focus on managing an aerospace enterprise with a specialization in aircraft engineering and production operations. Students in this course will work with industrial partners (examples: DeHavilland Aircraft Canada - Q400 Operations - Downsview, Safran Lading Gear Systems - Ajax, and Bombardier Aerospace - Toronto) on live projects applying the theory learned in the course. Upon course completion, the participants will be able to apply the tools and methods of Aerospace Enterprise Management Sciences and will:
gain an understanding and appreciation of the principles and applications relevant to management of the Aerospace Business Enterprise;
develop skills necessary to effectively analyze and synthesize the issues aerospace companies must address to scale and advance their capabilities in the marketplace;
acquire the analytical skills, tools and methods to scale the enterprise including lean design, lean engineering and manufacturing, voice of customer, process management, integrated product development, group technology, concurrent engineering, programme management, phase/milestone, agility, knowledge based engineering, expert systems, and ERP for aerospace environments;
learn how to design and build a Lean Aerospace Enterprise Management System from order receipt to shipping, commissioning and ongoing customer support;
understand how to apply Lean Engineering and Manufacturing systems that are used in aerospace operations;
increase their knowledge and broaden their perspective of the aerospace world to which they will contribute their talents as leaders in aerospace business operations; and
understand the various engineering career path options available in the aerospace environment.
This course can be counted toward the requirements of the ELITE program. AER 1601H is considered non-technical for the purposes of MEng degree requirements.

AER1604H - Air Accident Investigation
E. Tasker
Lecture course
This course will provide students with an introduction to the methods, processes and technologies of air accident investigation: what happens after there is an incident or accident involving airplanes in Canada. The course will begin by explaining what happens at the site of an air accident, and will then provide a concrete demonstration by creating a mock air accident using real aircraft wreckage. Students will use their observations of the accident site and other information that they acquire or derive to understand and report on what has occurred. The course will take students through the full investigative process and culminate in the production of an accident report using the techniques and information they have been given during the course.

AER507H - Introduction to Fusion Energy
J W Davis
Lecture course
Nuclear reactions between light elements provide the energy source for the sun and stars. On earth, such reactions could form the basis of an essentially inexhaustible energy resource. In order for the fusion reactions to proceed at a rate suitable for the generation of electricity, the fuels (usually hydrogen) must be heated to temperatures near 100 million Kelvin. At these temperatures, the fuel will exist in the plasma state.
This course will cover:
the basic physics of fusion, including reaction cross-sections, particle energy distribution, Lawson criterion and radiation balance,
plasma properties including plasma waves, plasma transport, heating and stability, and
magnetic confinement methods.
Topics will be related to current experimental research in the field.

AER1717Y & AER1720Y - Applied Plasma Physics I & II
P C Stangeby
Reading course
A second and third course in plasma physics and fusion energy for the student intending a career in these fields. Numerous problems are assigned from the text “Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion “, Vol. 1 by F. F. Chen, Plenum Press, 1984 (AER 1717H ) and “The Plasma Boundry of Magnetic Fusion Devices ” , by P.C. Stangeby, Institute of Physics Publishing, Bristol,U.K., 2000. (AER 1720H)

AER1800H - Research Seminar In Aerospace Science And Engineering
This is a required course for all new MASc students. The course material is based on the student’s thesis, and therefore it will vary from student to student. The objective of the course is to ensure that students devote a significant level of effort to their theses during their first year of graduate studies. Students will present a series of seminars based on their research progress and accomplishments.

AER1810H - M.Eng. Project
This course is offered to MEng students only. The projects associated with this course generally involve a professionally oriented design activity. Project topics, related to the aerospace field, are selected in consultation with staff. Work includes project identification and definition, literature survey, assessment of available information, and the design phase. Course mark is based on progress during the term, a final project report and a seminar presentation.

AER1820H - Directed Reading in Aerospace Studies
This course involves reading assigned by a professor to a graduate student on a mutually agreed topic. The student's knowledge is subsequently assessed for course credit. The total work load is consistent with a standard 0.5 FCE lecture course. Students are limited to counting a maximum of one reading course toward their degree requirements.

JDE1000H - Ethics in Research
Students registered in the MASc and PhD programs are required to participate in this non-credit seminar course during their first or second term of registration.

TEP1010H - Cognitive and Psychological Foundations of Effective Leadership
Robin Sacks
This course has been completely redesigned for life in our quarantined world. This semester's theme is Self-Leadership (because you can't lead anyone until you can lead yourself (!), and who better to practice your leadership skills on during quarantine than you?!) The class is completed in teams of 4, (but worry not - there are no graded team assignments!). Together your team will work through themes related to self-leadership like self-discipline (why can't I keep my new year's resolutions?), resilience (how can hard times and failures make me stronger?), and motivation (how can I stay engaged when I don't feel like it?). You'll also embark on 3 wild self-leadership quests that will challenge you to walk your talk in practical ways. I designed this course to be highly challenging, but stress free. It's full of fun activities and deep, meaningful conversations with your classmates to help get you through life off-campus.

TEP1011H - Authentic Leadership - Engineering Your Vibrant Future
Mike Farley and Nick Evans 
This course is aimed at helping engineering students to combine their knowledge and practical skills with their natural authentic leadership in order to create meaningful work and vibrant lives for themselves, their communities, and society. This course challenges the notion that leadership is a prescribed set of behaviours and allows students to explore their own authentic leadership. During the first half of the course students will use a variety of tools and concepts to explore ‘Who Am I’, ‘What Am I Fundamentally About’ and ‘How Do I Show Up’ to create the experiences and relationships that I want in my life & work. In the second half of the course students will learn an authentic teaming approach to co-creating meaningful change. Students will identify inspiring possibilities, work through core challenges, and create integrated solutions together as change agents for a vibrant future.

TEP1026H - Positive Psychology for Engineers
Robin Sacks
Many disciplines have explored happiness - philosophy, anthropology, psychology, sociology, neurobiology, film, art and literature - to name a few. Why not engineering? During the first part of the course we will play catch-up, examining the scholarly and creative ways that people have attempted to understand what makes for a happy life. Then we turn our attention to our own domain-expertise, applying engineering concepts like “balance”, “flow”, “amplitude”, “dynamic equilibrium”, “momentum” and others to explore the ways that your technical knowledge can contribute to a deep understanding of happiness. This course is designed to challenge you academically as we analyze texts from a variety of disciplines, but it is also designed to challenge you personally to explore happiness as it relates to yourself, your own personal development and your success and fulfillment as an engineer.

TEP1027H - Engineering Presentations
Lydia Wilkinson
Communication skill can be a critical success factor in engineering. Engineering know-how is given added power when communicated with clarity and simplicity in presentations that are thoughtfully planned and effectively executed. In this course, each student will make a large number of short presentations to sharpen their skills and increase their confidence. Students will grapple with capturing the essence of complex subjects and expressing it through key words, data and images. Students will be able to develop a wide range of skills: visual representation of data, systems and mechanisms; structuring and sequencing a talk; managing the tools, equipment and physical and psychological aspects of presentations; delivering speeches with vivid voice and body language; and finally, skills in connecting with an audience and achieving the desired impact.

TEP1029H - The Science of Emotional Intelligence and its Application to Leadership
Daniel Cushing
This course is designed for (best suited for) full time and part time engineering students with work experience
A growing body of social science research offers clear evidence that emotional intelligence (EQ) plays a crucial role in leadership effectiveness. We know that the most successful managers are able to motivate and achieve best performances through the ability to understand others, and the key to this is to first understand yourself. In this course, you will complete the most scientifically validated EQ assessment available, The Emotional Quotient Inventory (EQ-i) and receive a detailed report that identifies your leadership strengths and targets areas for development. You will acquire an enhanced level of self-knowledge and a deeper awareness of your impact on others. This will form the basis of a personal development plan that will help you improve your leadership effectiveness.In this course we will also examine evidence-based research that links leadership effectiveness to authenticity and mindfulness, both of which can be enhanced through mindfulness training programs. Simply defined, mindfulness is the awareness of one’s mental processes and the understanding of how one’s mind works. Using case studies, we will discover why companies such as Carlsberg, Google, Sony and General Electric have trained hundreds of employees in mindfulness.

TEP1030H - Engineering Careers - Theories & Strategies to Manage your Career for the Future
Mark Franklin
21st century career management skills and knowledge are critical success factors for engineers, to develop their own careers for the future, and as leaders and project managers, to help develop others’ careers. Especially in engineering where career engagement influences innovation and productivity, career management is arguably the most important learning to bridge the gap between an engineering education and an engineer’s ability to apply their learning in the real world.
In this course, students will learn about contemporary theories and issues in career development so they can apply their knowledge and skills, to benefit their own careers, and those of their team members, organization, and society. Students will learn an evidence-based framework for career clarification and exploration. Using this framework, students gain career management and job search strategies, increase hope and confidence, expand their network and use practical career management tools. In an increasingly volatile, uncertain, complex, and ambiguous world of work, students will consider career paths, hear and tell career stories, and gain skills to navigate a lifetime of transitions.

TEP1501H - Leadership and Leading in Groups and Organizations
Zoe Coull and Angela Tran
This course will examine leadership in relation to technology and the engineering profession. Topics will include: leadership theories, historic and current leaders, ethical leadership, teaming and networking, productivity and innovation, thinking frameworks, business leadership, and influencing people. Through this course students will explore their own leadership abilities and develop or strengthen their competencies in areas such as managing conflict, team dynamics, running effective meetings, developing others, and creation of vision and mission statements. The course will be delivered through lectures, workshops, readings, and guest speakers.

TEP1502H - Leadership in Product Design
Alison Olechowski
The objective of this course is to prepare students for the type of teams, processes and decisions used for complex socio-technical engineering design projects. The course will equip students with tools and strategies for leading, following other leaders, in this context. Students will have the opportunity to apply their learning on three hybrid team-individual assignments. The course readings will be sourced from real industry cases and experiences.

TEP1601H - Equity, Diversity & Inclusivity within Engineering Contexts
Mikhail Burke / Cori Hanson
There is growing demand (and requirements) within both industry and academia to have engineers, leaders, researchers, and instructors who are versed in equity, diversity and inclusion (EDI) principles and leverage that knowledge to positively influence the development and impact of their work. However, engineers and STEM researchers often feel unsure how to properly navigate these social principles within their technical spaces.
This course is for both working professionals or research academics who operate within engineering industry, research or teaching spaces seeking to develop an understanding of EDI principles and how they may apply to their technical contexts. This course seeks to provide students with space to learn about and develop tools, strategies and reflections when engaging equity and social considerations within their work.
Note: There is no pre-requisite knowledge required for this course. We welcome all learners whether you have no experience with EDI and want to learn more or you already have experience and are looking to deeper your learning.

APS511H - Inventions and Patents for Engineers
Teaches the process of preparing a patent application for an invention for engineers and scientists. Teaches methods to take an invention from conception to a level that a patent application can be filed on it. Describes how to write an invention disclosure. Describes how to prepare the background section, brief listing of figures, detailed description of the invention, independent and dependent claims, abstract, and artwork. Teaches use of patent search engines.

APS1012H - Managing Business Innovation and Transformational Change
Stephen Armstrong
The course will provide students with the core concepts of innovation including; strategic thinking, transformational change management, future state visioning, innovative enterprise design & development, new product development, business process management and sustaining a culture of innovation.  It has been designed for those who desire a career path leading to a role as a corporate change agent such as CEO, COO, Senior VP’s, C-Level Certified Management Consultants, or as entrepreneurs.  This seminar style course will equip students with the knowledge and the skills to manage innovation at strategic and operational levels. The management of innovation is interdisciplinary and multi-functional, requiring the alignment of market forces, technological systems and organizational change to improve the competitiveness and effectiveness of organizations and society. The process of innovation management is essentially generic, although organization, technological and market specific factors will guide strategic choices and actions. This course will incorporate both academic readings to provide the broad theory of innovation but most of the readings and discussions will be based on the instructors many years of hands on practical experience in innovation management in a variety of industry sectors.

APS1013H - Applying Innovation in Engineering
Stephen Armstrong
Applying Innovation is delivered in collaboration with external industry partners across many industry sectors.  It has been designed to develop practical management skills that can be applied in the workplace immediately.  Its purpose is to accelerate career advancement.   It has been designed for those who desire a career path leading to a role as a corporate change agent such as CEO, COO, Senior VP’s, C-Level Certified Management Consultants, or as entrepreneurs.  It will teach students the application of the tools and techniques of innovation management including; strategic and systems thinking, business process analysis, creativity and problem solving, solution design & implementation, effective organizational teamwork and project management. This seminar style course aims to equip students with the knowledge and skills to apply the tools of creativity and innovation to solve a real world technological business problem. Applying innovation will enable students in a team approach to actually use the tools in the class and on an industrial project either at their employer or an external enterprise. This course will also incorporate academic scholarly papers that will build on the readings in the Management of Innovation APS1012 course. In addition the instructor will provide coaching based on many years of hands on practical experience solving technological problems in a variety of industry sectors. Though not mandatory it would be ideal if students have completed the course APS1012 - Management of Innovation that provides students with a conceptual understanding of the broad field of strategic innovation.

APS1015H - Social Entrepreneurship
Alex Kjorven
This course is designed for students interested in applying their existing knowledge and skills toward addressing pressing social or environmental issues. Using the principles of entrepreneurship, this course provides students with an understanding of the systems within which wicked challenges emerge, sample a variety of different solutions being applied and learn how to leverage market–based tools to respond to these important issues.
For a sneak peak into lecture content from a previous semester, here is a video walk through (note the video references synchronous online delivery, however actual course delivery format may be different. See course details for the format relevant to your term).
https://share.vidyard.com/watch/RDFQKKxaBFw4sEWHMDoeym? 

APS1023H - New Product Innovation
Amir Rahim
This course examines technical and organizational aspects of managing new products and process innovations. Topics include human creativity and problem solving, product design and development, product feasibility assessments, requirements engineering, managing research and development, project management, team communication, technology implementation, and innovation strategy.

APS1033H - Business Innovation Leading to the Future, based on Imagineering
Joseph C. Paradi
This course will demonstrate how an entrepreneurial person could get ahead of the curve as the future of technology develops. Instructors and guests will train the students to use their technical skills and problem solving abilities to identify where the world around them will be 10 or more years from now. The future is where the students in this course will have to live and prosper.
However, the skills learned here will be immediately useful when getting a job now - your accomplishments in the course will show how ready you are to tackle problems now and in the future. The core goal is to assess opportunities many years in the future and using “Imagineering” to identify startup possibilities and how to pick the best ones.
Topics covered will all be designed to increase the student's competence in the Canadian business world. Such aspects include the assessment of what future technological challenges will emerge and how to find the business opportunities to solve such problems in both private and public contexts. The students will learn how seek business opportunities for their firms or themselves and communicate such vision to decision makers. Thus, they will improve their marketability when seeking a job.
The delivery is via 12 three hour sessions with a mix of lectures, outside speakers, group work and presentations on topics on emerging/future opportunities. There is an emphasis on technological leadership as the course teaches you how to be out front and be seen as a leader. Topics may include the social problems of wastewater engineering, air/particulate emissions, traffic engineering, project definition and financing and others.
A highly interactive environment will encourage out of the box thinking and innovative approaches to large problems which impresses potential employers and your co-workers. There will be a number of assignments, projects and a term report. Class interaction with grading will be done in 6 of the sessions where both individual and group presentations will be required. Cases will be used for some of the projects. There will be no written final examination.

APS1035H - Taking a New Venture to Market
Steve Treiber
At some point in their careers most engineers and scientists they find themselves with the need to convince their boss, their company, their co-workers, or a client to try some new idea. That new idea, product or service might be so novel that there are no easy comparisons to be made to something existing and proven. This is the crux of the innovator's dilemma and the title of a famous book by Clayton Christensen1. Most science and engineering schools teach their students how to organize their data and facts. Through group projects students are exposed to the need to argue their point of view, negotiate compromise, and then present their results and ideas to their professors to get the best marks.
Many schools also give students an opportunity to develop business plans. However, very few schools teach their students how to sell their technological ideas to a complex audience who often have conflicting views and needs, and perhaps limited technical knowledge, but who all have some influence on the decision. In fact, in most cases the decision makers have little or no technical competence in the specific subject in question and the engineer/scientist’s argument often comes down to “trust me”.
The course is all about how to get people to listen and gain enough trust in you to take a chance on your offer. Students will learn the keys to selling a “customer” on an idea, product or service that they passionately believe in. The course is designed to have a variety of learning objectives which are delivered via lectures, exercises, role playing, group presentations and homework assignments. The students will learn how to organize and communicate their thoughts and facts in a way that will increase their probability of succeeding in convincing the decision makers that they should take a chance on a new idea or innovation.
Some students may come with or develop real, viable ideas. In those cases the instructor may introduce them to the Hatchery or one of the many incubators and accelerators on campus and in the GTA, and even commercial companies that might have an interest in their product or service.

APS1036H - Formative Experiential Entrepreneurial Learning (FEELTM)
Joseph Orozco
The overall objective of this course is that students increase their confidence in their ability to create a start-up by solving high impact problems and defining its business model. The FEELTM methodology, used in this course, provides students with a hands-on opportunity and a real world application of the entrepreneurship mindset. The course will help students define a start-up that creates value for co-founders while creating a forum for mentorship and knowledge exchange. The course is structured as a process to define the startup’s business model, the creation of a business canvas and an investor pitch deck. Students will be guided on the use of tools to manage team building/dynamics, market fit, scaling, user insight generation, pitching and the FEELTM’s modified business model generation canvas(*). Students will be working in teams.  Team members can be fellow students or outside the classroom partners.
This course will also provide students with an understanding, guidance and access to resources in the University of Toronto’s start-up eco-system, featuring the Entrepreneurship Hatchery at the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering.
The FEEL Business Model Generation Canvas uses principles originally created by Alexander Osterwalder & Yves Pigneur

APS1043H - Writing Your Own Patent Application
Nasser Ashgriz
This course teaches the students how to write and file their own patent application.
Students can select inventions that already exist or simply start from an idea that they are interested and develop it under the instructor’s guidance.
The final project of the students in this class is preparation and filing of their own invention. Differences between a technical article and a patent are identified, and the method of converting a technical article to a patent application is discussed.
The course evaluation is based on homework and projects on development of the idea and invention, patent search, preparation of drawings, preparation of specifications of the application and drafting claims.  The assessment materials are individual and can be done online or in person. There are minimum issues of plagiarism in this course since each student will have his/her own individual assignment.
This course does not intend to prepare students to become patent agents and pass a patent agency test.

APS1061H - Business Strategy and Intrapreneurship
Steven Treiber, steve.treiber@utoronto.ca, 416-725-1774
This course is designed for engineering students interested in discovering if they have the aptitude and appetite to lead a large business. Every business executive and entrepreneur will encounter complex business problems they urgently must solve. The short course format simulates the speed with which such real-world problems can arise and the speed with which they must be solved. Covid19, SARS, and 9/11 are examples of extreme events that can destroy a business suddenly. Leveraging some of the problem-solving skills, you have learned during your engineering education, this course teaches how to define, solve, communicate, and sell the solution to a complex business problem using an engineering approach.
Students will work in groups of 2 to 3 and all groups will develop a solution to the challenge business problem. The groups will be given a package of materials that identifies the problem in the first class and all groups will come up with their own definition and solution during the course. This year the challenge business problem will be: Facebook is transforming itself to META Platforms a new venture to expand the internet to a three dimensional space. After failing to launch Calibra/DIEM and the Libra/DIEM blockchain, Facebook is pushing forward. Facebook is facing a number of challenges including skittish partners, regulatory and Congressional resistance who BIG tech’s power and they seem to have picked Facebook as the weakest link. Covid19 could be a threat or an opportunity. Our objective is to develop a business strategy and plan that will make this business successful.
The course was developed and is taught by successful Canadian entrepreneurs who imagined, built and later sold their successful businesses. The course materials, lectures, and assignments are based on their personal experiences and published best practices. The course and materials provides students with a toolkit for defining and solving business problems, and the course project is an exercise in how to do it. Guest speakers who are subject matter experts in the business domain are invited to afternoon sessions during the course.

APS1088H - Business Planning and Execution for Canadian Entrepreneurs
Steve Treiber 
This is a course on how to start and run a successful Canadian business that is profitable on day ONE, using a real start-up example. If your ambition is to be your own boss one day this is the course for you. The course was developed and is taught by successful Canadian entrepreneurs who imagined, built and sold at least one of their successful businesses. The course and materials provides students with a toolkit for starting and running a successful business, and through the course project an exercise in how to do that.
If you already have a business idea the course will assist you in making that business idea a success and if you don’t have an idea the course will teach you how to find and develop one of your own.

APS500H1 - Negotiations in an Engineering Context
Instruction of concepts, theories, and research but most importantly the practice of negotiation skills. The course will cover all kinds of negotiations scenarios that individuals might face in the course of their careers as Engineers; this could include a range of single-issue single-party negotiations to multi-party multi-issues negotiations.

APS502H1 - Financial Engineering
Roy Kwon
This course will focus on capital budgeting, financial optimization, and project evaluation models and their solution techniques. In particular, linear, non-linear, and integer programming models and their solutions techniques will be studied. The course will give engineering students a background in modern capital budgeting and financial techniques that are relevant in practical engineering and commercial settings.

APS1001H - Project Management
Darya Duma | Course Syllabus
Course intro here. Project management has evolved from being an accidental job title into being a chosen profession with career paths and a body of knowledge. This course covers most of the knowledge areas of the Project Management Institute: integration, scope, cost, time, risk, human resources, procurement and communications management. We take a practical, applied approach, with the “PMBOK Guide” textbook, in-class exercises, and a team paper on “lessons learned” from an actual project. This a completely asynchronous online course.

APS1004H - Human Resources Management: An Engineering Perspective
Tom Stephenson
This course analyzes the relationship between management and workers in an engineering (including construction and manufacturing) environment. The course takes a holistic and strategic view of how industrial relations affect the business environment. Students will study industrial relations from the context of engineering-related industries, economics, sociology, and psychology. Students will develop an historical appreciation and perspective of the evolution and development of labour relations through concepts presented by figures such as Adam Smith, Fredrick Taylor, Charles Deming, and J.M. Juran. The goal of the course is to provide a general manager with a thorough understanding of how they can develop a competitive advantage for their organization through effective and thoughtful human resource management practices. In the context of how they relate to engineering and industrial relations, the course topics include: organizational behaviour including methods of motivation, scientific management, quality control, employment and economics, employment as a social relation, unions and other forms of employee representation, internal labour markets, strategic planning and the formulation of human resource strategy, practices and policies.

APS1005H - Operations Research for Engineering Management
Daniel Frances
This course introduces optimization techniques applicable in solving various engineering programs. These techniques are widely used in engineering design, optimal control, production planning, reliability engineering, and operations management. The contents of this course can be classified into two major categories: modeling techniques and optimization algorithms. Topics include linear programming, sensitivity analysis, nonlinear programming, dynamic programming, decision making under uncertainty, new developments in optimization techniques. The course will also examine several case studies to gain understanding of real applications of optimization techniques.

APS1009 - Natural Resources Management
Eduardo Fernandez
This course focuses on management of projects on Natural resources and offer graduate engineering students the opportunity to learn specific management skills and management tools, from a holistic view of issues related to the management of natural resource projects and enterprises, and the required knowledge to identify and develop sustainable solutions to the interdisciplinary challenges related to the sustainable management of natural resources projects. The course also considers the management of public enterprises that are in charge of planning and developing national resources and important sustainable national and regional natural resources projects, such as water, environment, energy, minerals resources, or biological resources, not only in Canada, but also internationally. This course will help students to develop the necessary skills and capabilities needed and required in real life from graduate engineers, to be able to work successfully in natural resources management and natural resources projects and enterprises, whether working with the public sector or private sector, or in P3-Public Private Partnership and projects or working with a non-governmental organization, These skills will enable the students to work with different stakeholders,thinking strategically and keeping in mind always, the social responsibility as a core of all the projects related to natural resources. The course utilizes lectures, guest speakers,class discussions and analysis on real cases, and requires students to write and present a final team project report.

APS1016H - Financial Management for Engineers
Babu Gajaria
The students will be exposed to classical equity valuation methods; such as discounted cash flow analysis, net asset value, fundamental analysis and relative value analysis, using measures such as P/E multiples and P/Cash flow multiples. The students will be introduced to the principles of bond and stock valuations with a special emphasis on its relation to the cost of capital. The course will take an in depth view of capital budgeting, capital investment decisions and project analysis and evaluations. It will introduce students to the concept risk and return in equity markets. The students will get hands on experience in calculating cost of capital and hence the appropriate discount rate to use in valuations. Theory of optimal capital structure and financial leverage will be discussed in addition to economic value added principles. The relevance of dividends and dividend policy will be debated in class. The concept of “does dividend policy matter” will be subject of a vigorous debate. Finally the topic of mergers and acquisitions will be covered in depth, with particular reference to recent mergers of Canadian companies.

APS1017H - Supply Chain Management and Logistics
C.G. Lee
This course is to provide students with a framework to design and control supply chain systems. To achieve the goal, the course will cover key modules in supply chain. The students will be exposed to topics such as: inventory theories, transportation, postponement strategies, supply chain dynamics, value of information, supply chain flexibility, and environmental issues. We will focus on the analytical decision support tools (both models and applications), as well as on the organizational models that successfully allow companies to develop, implement and sustain supplier management and collaborative strategies.

APS1020H - International Business for Engineers
Eduardo Fernandez
This course provides an important background on sustainable international business for all engineering disciplines through Learning skills on International Business, learning management tools, and "hands-on" project work and BUSINESS CASES analysis for engineers. Each week there will be class discussion on an international business case and/or on new business concepts and learning new Management tools as part of the weekly learning and assignments. The course utilizes lectures, International experienced guest speakers, such as CEO or members of the board of directors of International Engineering firms with projects and experience both in Canada and abroad, as well as guest speaker with global experience, also the course uses real case analyses, and requires students to write and to present a final Team project report. There will be tutorials by appointment for those students (teams) that will require additional time for learning or understanding IB issues and concepts for the course and for the Final team project. This course reaches beyond merely learning the basic concepts of international business. We will use real life examples to practice and debate the different principles and best practices used to pursue cross-border operations considering all the different stakeholders. This course on IB provides context to enable the graduate engineering student for a deeper learning on IB, and related skills. Also, this course provides what could be, for some students, the first true international business course for engineers with the guidelines and help from your experienced instructor. This 2023 course is about not just the updated knowledge on IB but to acquire the practical skills and management tools needed when pursuing sustainable business across the borders. You will get an understanding of the current issues (2023), such as the current trade war between USA vs China, and Brexit, Also the current geopolitical events in The Americas, affecting the whole continent, also about Europe and MENA regions current issues affecting international business and how it may affect Canada, Europe, Asia, and Africa, pointing out in class discussions about opportunities and Risks. How may be affected international businesses with the recent high interest rate environment. Also, we will explore how new technologies such as AI and blockchain are changing the arena of International Business and how we can prepare for the present and future on international business. The interrelation between different Stakeholders and Corporate Social Responsibility is a core learning consideration on this course, within the learning of holistic analysis approach of international projects considering ESG, Environment, Social and Governance factors, risk, and opportunities.

APS1022H - Financial Engineering II
Roy H. Kwon, C.G. Lee
The course presents two important topics in financial engineering: portfolio optimization and derivative pricing. These two topics are explored by the application of a number of mathematical tools, including linear programming, nonlinear programming, statistical analysis, and the theory of stochastic calculus.

APS1028H - Operations and Production Management for Manufacturing and Services
Stephen C Armstrong
Operations Management is the systematic approach and control of the processes that transform inputs (e.g. human resources, facilities, materials, processes, enterprise management information systems, etc.) into finished goods and services.  The operations function consists of the core wealth creation processes of a business and helps an organization to efficiently achieve its mission while constantly increasing productivity and quality. This course focuses on the role of operations management as a strategic element of the total organization.  We will cover classic and up-to-date tools and concepts used to support operational managerial decisions in variety of industry sectors both in manufacturing and the service sector.  The course covers areas such as strategy, product design, process design, plant location and plant layout, inventory management, role of technology in OM, HRM, Socio-Tech Systems, Group Technology, ERP / CIM, Quality Management, Maintenance Management.  The course is tailored for engineers that aspire to senior management positions starting as departmental / functional managers of operations or engineering, and then progressing to directors, VP Operations, VP Manufacturing and eventually becoming a Chief Operations Officer (COO) or C-Level Certified Management Consultants in small to large scale enterprises.  This course will incorporate academic scholarly readings to provide the broad theory of OM but most of the readings and discussions will be based on the instructors many years of hands on practical experience in OM in a variety of industry sectors.

APS1032 - Introduction to Energy Project Management
Payam Rahimi
Project management is important for any business organization, but particularly so for the energy industry. Sufficient controls are needed during initiation, study, implementation, and closeout of any energy project, and project managers within the energy environment (such as oil, gas, nuclear, …) face unique challenges and important risk management considerations. This course will expose students to best project management practices within the context of the energy industry. The course will introduce the particular characteristics of managing energy projects from the planning phase to closeout. Environmental assessments, geopolitical considerations, the political landscape, risk management and the roles of different players will be discussed. Tools to monitor the health and progress of a project will be introduced. Examples of different types of energy projects in the fields of nuclear, bio-mass, oil, gas, wind and solar will be used to illustrate concepts.

APS1038H - Strategic Sustainability Management for Businesses and Products
Jabeen Quadir
This cross-disciplinary graduate course provides a holistic overview of the environmental, social, economic and governance (ESEG) aspects of strategic sustainability management for businesses and products. You will have the opportunity to learn about a variety of industry sector, business and product sustainability challenges along with collaborative solutions applied and results achieved. You will gain a broad, cross-functional, cross-disciplinary perspective that will prepare you to facilitate sustainability management programs.
The importance of integrating strategic sustainability management into the interconnected network of systems that make up the business-to-business value chain will be discussed. The value of managing sustainability impacts throughout the full life cycle of products will also be addressed. Internationally recognized frameworks, best practices, methodologies and tools based on ISO international standards will be introduced as vehicles for practical application of solutions that support leadership in sustainability performance improvement.
This course is for graduate engineering students who wish to gain a broader and deeper understanding of business and product strategic sustainability management from multiple stakeholder perspectives that make up the business-to-business value chain. This course is for you— if you aspire to be a sustainability change agent within industry, who believes that businesses can and should be a thriving force for good in the world. You seek to understand, facilitate and influence how stakeholders can collaborate to lead the development and implementation of transformative sustainability management systems and programs.
Students will have the opportunity to select and research an existing cross-sector sustainability challenge along with the solutions applied and results achieved. You will present a summary of your work to the class to enhance peer-to-peer learning.

APS1039H - Enterprise Risk Management
Joanna Makomaski
Risk Management is a highly valued discipline and eagerly sought after by organizations that are heavily regulated, requiring high resiliency, that deal with environmental, health and safety issues, involved in project management, insurance, financial services and also within the public sector.
Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) is a decision support system that helps such organizations understand risk and assure the achievement of their goals. Engineers often play an integral role in an organization’s ERM effort, from identifying risk and assisting in the design and implementation of risk response solutions. This course is intended to provide to a high level understanding of what is risk and what does an ERM process look like for organizations including some common challenges and pitfalls of institutionalizing an ERM culture.

APS1040H - Quality Control for Engineering Management
Daniel Frances
This course introduces quality control techniques applicable in various engineering settings. These techniques are widely used in monitoring and improving the quality of both products and services. Topics include process quality inferences, statistical process control, various control charts, system capability analysis, design of experiments, and acceptance sampling. Various simulation models will be used to represent and generate data sets in various settings, for analysis and charting with widely available software.

APS1049H - Management Consulting For Engineers
Stephen C Armstrong
Management Consulting will continue to be a significant career option for many graduate students, regardless of whether a student’s academic foundation is in business, engineering, or the basic sciences. Careers in Management Consulting often provide individuals an opportunity for challenging work, continued self-development, access to important social and professional networks, and, over time, significant financial rewards. This course is designed to enable graduate engineers explore, and prepare for a career in management consulting. The course is taught by Fellow Certified Management Consultant (FCMC), licensed professional engineer, and as an entrepreneur built and sustained a management consulting business over a period of 25 years. The Global Management Consulting Industry has grown in size and complexity particularly since the early 1990’s. Although there are many small niche firms, the industry is dominated by a relatively few very large global organizations that practice in a variety of business settings and business disciplines. In addition many businesses have developed internal consulting organizations to provide consulting related services within the organization and often in conjunction with external consulting services offered by third party firms. In this course we explore what it means to be a Management Consultant, and will introduce students to consulting frameworks and methods; simulate consulting project activities and situations using business cases; and network students with practicing consulting professionals from a variety of global and local firms. Within the context of this course, consulting is viewed broadly and is inclusive of a number of practice areas including Strategy , IT and Systems Integration, Marketing, Human Resource Management, Operational / Process / Supply Chain, Organizational Development, and the very specialized area of Engineering and Product Development Management. Consulting also cuts across a wide variety of industry sectors from public sector (government, health care, infrastructure, defense etc), to private sector (manufacturing, oil gas, natural resources), Course participants will be organized into teams and will have the opportunity to identify and complete a project on the practice of management consulting that is aligned to the emerging needs of the profession (collaborating with external partner firms). In addition students will wear an entrepreneurial hat, and will be required to develop an individual blue print, and business plan of their future management consulting business which might be in an emerging field of consulting such as life sciences, data analytics, cyber security, crowdsourcing and digital strategy.

APS1050H - Blockchain Technologies And Cryptocurrencies
Loren Trigo and Sabatino Costanzo
Bitcoin is a particular implementation of Blockchain technology that has led to a disruptive “product”: a set of digital cryptocurrencies with the potential to compete with fiat currencies. This course will provide students with the concepts and mechanics of the Blockchain technologies starting from Bitcoin. Unlike ECE1770, this course is not focused on middleware software design per se, but on how the Blockchain middleware can serve as a platform that supports products (cryptocurrencies, tokens) and applications that are relevant for businesses and other users. Students become acquainted with the history and typology of Blockchain technologies; develop and apply a set of selection criteria for the evaluation of Blockchain consensus strengths, weaknesses and risks; trace a likely path for the adoption of Blockchain technologies-- beginning with the identification of processes where Blockchain ledgers lead to efficiencies, to the emergence of new business models where the use of cryptography is essential. For this reason, this course includes a gentle but complete introduction to cryptography that covers all the essentials from asymmetric encryption to “zero-knowledge-proof-of-knowledge” proofs.  On a practical level, participants acquire a concrete understanding of Blockchain technologies through the installation, operation and modification of a number of Blockchain technologies that operate in real-world testnet networks: starting from the operation/modification of a simple Bitcoin node; moving on to the operation of Bitcoin and Ethereum wallets, and to the operation/modification of Ethereum clients or DApps providing a business service, and ending with the trading of a cryptocurrency account. For more details please go to the Course Layout section of the Syllabus.

APS1051H - Portfolio Management Praxis Under Real Market Constraint
Sabatino Costanzo and Loren Trigo
Syllabus
After an introductory review of the techniques most commonly used to evaluate investment portfolios and investment managers and an overview of the theoretical foundations of modern finance, this course will, through a combination of lectures, readings, real case studies and hands-on exercises, enable students to learn how to use --in real time and under real constraints--, the five main algorithmic trading & portfolio management systems developed by the instructors to manage their own clients’ investment  portfolios in their professional private practice. After completing this course the participants should be able to manage basic Stocks and ETF portfolios as well as trading currency pairs and basic derivatives portfolios of Credit & Debit Spreads, by using time-tested “value” and “momentum” strategies, statistical-arbitrage pairs-trading techniques and covered options algorithms, all coded in the python programs developed by the instructors to that end. Students will also be able to manage the risk of any basic investment portfolio using index-option’s hedging and/or market breadth- based algorithms, and to apply the best known tests to evaluate the back-testing results of different trading systems. As collateral benefits of this course, participants will be exposed to the basics of python in finance -as they learn how to calibrate the trading software shared by the instructors-, as well as to basic equity valuation methods, basic portfolio optimization methods and basic bond and derivative pricing methods. Participants will be also exposed through case studies to the portfolio management strategies of some of the most important contemporary portfolio managers and apply digested versions of their techniques to basic portfolios under real market constraints. In the long run, after having assimilated and tested what they’ve learned in this course, students should be able to assemble general portfolio management strategies well adapted to their own risk/return profiles. For more details please go to the Course Layout section of the Syllabus.

APS1052H - A.I. in Finance
Sabatino Costanzo and Loren Trigo
Course Description:
In this course we’ll give an overview of several applications of machine learning to capital market forecasting and credit modeling, beginning with regressions, “shallow” layered machine learning models (e.g. Support Vector Machines, Random Forests), and ending with “deep” layered machine learning models (e.g. Long Short Term Memory Networks). Each model is discussed in detail as to what input variables and what architecture is used (rationale), how the model’s learning progress is evaluated and how machine learning scientists and capital market traders evaluate the model’s final performance so that by the end of the course, the students should be able to identify the main features of a machine learning model for capital market forecasting and to evaluate if it is likely to be useful and if it is structured efficiently in terms of inputs and outputs.
The course covers (but it is not limited to) the following subjects: Training and testing workflow: scaling, cross-validation pipelines. Gradient descent: mini-batch, stochastic. Financial metrics: profitability and risk. Financial feature engineering. Models: multivariate regression, logistic regression, support vector machines, principal component analysis, decision trees, random forests, k-means, and hierarchical clustering, Gaussian mixtures, MLPs, LSTMs, and auto-encoder neural networks. Applications: credit modeling, financial time-series forecasting, investment portfolio design, and spread trading, credit cycle regime identification. For more details, please see the Course Layout in the Syllabus.
In terms of requisites, the participant should be familiar with the foundations of statistics, the basics of logistic regressions (desirable), and basic linear algebra (desirable); however, since our course intends to be self-contained, we will provide a review of these concepts as needed. As the examples of our course come from finance, some familiarity with capital markets and the basic financial concepts is recommended. Basic knowledge of Python or some other programming language is recommended, even though the objective of the course is not to learn how to program (shallow & deep) machine learning models from scratch, but rather, to understand how they work and to learn how to adapt them to the particular needs of the user and to optimize their application to market forecasting. The mathematical foundations of the basic machine learning models (regressions, neural networks, support vector machines, trees etc.) will be discussed and followed by a panoramic view of the inputs that are most likely to provide valuable information for market forecasting. Standard benchmarking methods used in the industry will be also covered. Subsequently, a number of basic --already programmed-- models will be discussed in detail and their performance evaluated.
 
APS1053H - Case Studies in A.I. in Finance
Sabatino Costanzo and Loren Trigo | Syllabus
Course Description:
This course has been structured over a collection of (more than 20) real-life case studies that are practical applications of many of the topics discussed in the other courses we teach. The course ("Case Studies of A. I. in Finance"), will be taught in the format of a seminar, which means, among other things, that it will be delivered in an informal [(*) Refreshments included] but collegiate atmosphere in which participants are considered as colleagues, with all the advantages and responsibilities that this entails.
The course will start with some introductory sessions (taught by the instructors and possibly some guests) aimed to establish the theoretical foundations needed to make the course self-sufficient regarding the topics to be discussed during the seminar presentations. Specifically, the introductory sessions, --to be held before the “reading-week break”--, will consist of general reviews covering topics that go from a "Basic Finance Primer" to a "Comprehensive Introduction to Reinforcement Learning". (After the reading-week break, though, the seminar sessions will consist of presentations of case studies assigned to the participating students).
The Fall Term will is a good opportunity to take this seminar, given that it may not be offered in the future as frequently as our other courses due to the organizational challenges that its logistics imply.
Since the long-term goal of this seminar is to establish the foundation of a stable platform for promoting Fin-Tech research, we want to extend here an open invitation to all students of the Winter 22 and the Fall 23 editions of this course, to keep attending its future editions as active speakers, so that this event may transcend its condition of being "one more course in Finance" to become a functional and growing community of professionals interested in Fin-Tech.
Summarizing, APS 1053 focuses on the application of advanced artificial intelligence techniques to more than 20 solved case studies in stock trading and hedging strategies, portfolio construction, modelling options strategies, investor’s modelling, financial news and building Robotic-Advisors. The advanced techniques include the incorporation of recently open-sourced libraries for the calculation and evaluation of financial indicators, the incorporation of custom functions for cross-validation, evaluation and model selection, the reformulation of problems in terms of reinforcement learning and the implementation in Python of reinforcement learning solutions and the analysis of situations where reinforcement learning fails. Only basic coding skills (preferably in Python) and a very basic familiarity with Finance terminology will be needed for the course.

APS510H1 - Innovative Technologies and Organizations in Global Energy Systems
Nitish Sarker
A broad range of global energy systems are presented including electricity generation, electricity end use, transportation and infrastructure. Discussions are based on two key trends: (a) the increasing ability to deploy technologies and engineering systems globally, and (b) innovative organizations, many driven by entrepreneurship (for profit and social) and entrepreneurial finance techniques. The course considers these types of innovations in the context of developed economies, rapidly developing economies such as India and China, and the developing world. The course will interweave a mix of industry examples and more in-depth case studies. The examples and cases are examined with various engineering, business and environmental/sustainability analysis perspectives.

APS1018H - The Engineer in Society: Ethics, History, Philosophy (formerly History and Philosophy of Engineering)
Stephen C Armstrong
This course has been designed for the reflective engineer with experience in the workplace. Though those without real world industry experience are welcome. Designed by a professional engineer for engineers, technologists, applied scientists and engineering executives, it will help practitioners reflect on their role in society and understand how that role has been shaped and is constantly changing. Most of the world’s leading employers depend on engineers, technologists, and applied scientists to design new technological systems, products and services and effectively operate and sustains these systems. Human resource leaders are charged with attracting, motivating, developing, and retaining these individuals, as well as partnering with them on large-scale systems change. This course provides insider insight into the way engineers think and feel about the work they do. It begins by studying the history of medieval and modern technology and proceeds to explore the rise of engineering science, the engineering disciplines and 19th century professionalization. And finally we explore how engineering ethics, culture, philosophy and identity has been shaped and forged in various countries, and how this impacts the role of the engineer in society.  Each term we adapt themes across many aspects of society including, Military Industrial Security Complex, Big Pharma, Cyber Security, Technology and Privacy, Industry-Banking-Power-Politics, Globalization, Engineering Profession and Politics. We also look at futurism, and ethical implications - 4th industrial revolution and smart cities, telecommunications, mass media control, robotization of the military, biological engineering, transhumanism, war, business, and profit.
What also comes to mind for me is the concept "I wished I had known then what I know now". This is often a sentiment by older people (50 plus) who look back on their careers or life in general and wish they had the "wisdom" to make a different decision or choose a different path but lacked the awareness at the time to explore other choices.

APS1024H - Infrastructure Resilience Planning
Alec Hay
Planning for resilience is a fundamental of strategic and operational planning of infrastructure and requires an in-depth understanding of the operation one wishes to make resilient, its context and operating environment. This course teaches resilience planning from first principles, including the development and application of international and Canadian infrastructure resilience and investment policy, demand and dependency management, all-hazards and mitigation strategies and its relationship to Enterprise Risk Management and Business Continuity Planning.

APS1025H - Infrastructure Protection
Alec Hay
A fully integrated protection scheme is necessary to efficiently implement an Infrastructure Resilience Plan to assure operational survival following a catastrophic event. Building on the first principles of security integration and fortifications practice, illustrated with case studies through history, the students explore site security surveys, different tools, mitigation methods and models in common use and the assumptions and technology behind them in order to make informed decisions on how to approach and solve an infrastructure protection problem for the full range of event types. This is then practised in partnership with industry, analysing real security integration issues for real clients, to whom the students will present their protection schemes.

APS1031H - Infrastructure Planning
Alec Hay
This course is a guided exploration of infrastructure planning through a fundamental understanding of first principles and discussion about their application to various aspects of the discipline. This will include strategic planning, cost, finance, risk, resilience, design and the different applications from facilities to utilities, disaster relief and policy development. Guest presentations by recognized Subject Matter Experts round out the practical appreciation with case studies. The course is accessible to undergraduates, while providing an essentially post-graduate perspective. Given the enormity of this field, detailed exploration of any of the lecture topics is not possible. Instead, students will be encouraged to read further into the topics of interest and directed to existing courses that explore the topic in greater detail.

APS1034H - Making Sense of Accidents
Part of Accident Causation and Risk Management Courses
Julian Lebenhaft
This course introduces the main theoretical approaches of systems thinking, organization structure and crisis management for understanding catastrophic accidents. Highlighting the socio-technical limits to the prevention of severe accidents, it emphasizes the importance of incorporating such insights in engineering design with the aim of reducing the likelihood of disasters.

APS1101H - System Dynamic Risk Management
Part of Accident Causation and Risk Management Courses
Julian Lebenhaft
The course provides new perspectives on safety and human error and shows how to incorporate humans in complex automated systems using systems thinking.

APS1420H - Technology, Engineering and Global Development
This is a joint graduate/undergraduate course, which explores a broad range of topics centered on the role of technology and engineering in global development. The course format is a combination of lectures by the instructor and guest speakers, discussion of assigned readings (academic journals, book excerpts, popular press, etc.), review of case studies, and student presentations. Topics covered include: (1) a brief history of international development, foreign aid, and major players involved (e.g. UN, World Bank, government agencies, NGOs), (2) technological innovation and diffusion theory and practice, (3) new international development models (e.g. social entrepreneurship, microfinance, risk capital approaches) and finance organizations involved (e.g. Grameen Bank, Gates Foundation, Acumen Fund, etc.), (4) implication of major global trends (e.g. globalization, urbanization) for sustainable development. The above topics are addressed in the context of specific case studies of technologies and technology sectors involving health, energy, infrastructure, finance, and communications. The goal of this course is to inform students of the various causes and consequences of global poverty, and to highlight ways that they can apply their technical, engineering, and entrepreneurship knowledge towards addressing complex global challenges.